Cluster 1

	Documents:
		1( 5 ). Space science has long sought the answer to the cause for different types of auroral structures and their occurrence at different times within the global magnetic activity. The research scientists in this program have in the past attempted to trace the effects of currents from the ionosphere near quiet time auroral structures into the magnetosphere using quiet time magnetic field models. This new project will use a more disturbed model of the magnetosphere to investigate more dynamic structures associated with the auroral substorm, such as auroral loops, poleward surges and omega bands. In addition, this new model will allow study of mapping effects produced by the diversion of cross-tail current to the ionosphere. These studies of the coupling between electron and ion currents in the inner magnetotail may help to unravel some of the physical processes that take place during the auroral substorm onset.

		2( 7 ). This project involves a study of recovery, reconstruction and mitigation activities in Charleston, South Carolina in the aftermath of Hurricane Hugo. The research will have three primary goals. First, to examine reconstruction policies in relationship to their impact upon mitigation. Second, to analyze the influence of hazard reduction activities in one area (seismic hazards) upon the impact and recovery from a related, though different, hazard. Third, to study the effect of place specific sense of community upon the reconstruction and mitigation processes. Data sources will include interviews with officials, a survey of households, and relevant documents and reports.

		3( 22 ). This dissertation will compare five ladino communities of rural Guatemala on the basis of their various agricultural production systems. The objective of the study is to assess the differential impact each of these production systems has on the social mobility (i.e., changing standards of living and access to the means of production over time) of small family farms. The study will use data already collected by the Institute of Nutrition for Central American and Panama and data that will be generated by original fieldwork. Data on the seasonality of production practices, cropping patterns, time allocation of household members, and fluctuations in household income will be collected by interviews with husbands and wives at frequent intervals.

		4( 34 ). The purpose of this collaborative project is to extend the Batemen-Foust 1860 data set by collecting data for the same townships from the manuscripts of the 1880 Census of Population and Agriculture. These two data sets will then be linked across households between the two census dates to provide a large scale cross-section/time-series database on families, households, individuals, farms, and communities in the second half of the nineteenth century. The resulting composite database promises important new insights into the development of the American economy at a critical period in its history and offers long term research material for economic historians, demographers, rural sociologists and scholars from other disciplines. It is also of potential interest and relevance for contemporary research since the late nineteenth century witnessed the structural change of America from a rural, agricultural country to an urban-industrial one, a change analogous to the on-going shift from manufacturing to services.

		5( 40 ). The major objective of this U.S.-Czechoslovak cooperative research project between Dr. Rustum Roy of the Pennsylvania State University and Dr. Jan Mailing of the Slovak Technical University is to study the basic thermal, mechanical and dielectric properties of a family of ultra low expansion materials, known as the NSP-family (nasicon type termary and quarternary systems.) The researchers intend to em phasize phase equilibrium studies, drawing upon a compatability computation method developed at the Slovak Technical University. Its use should shorten time for systematic experimental study of such complex systems. Results should yield a systematic phase diagram and lead to our ability to characterize these NZP-type materials for their sintering behavior in controlled furnace atmospheres (i.e., oxygenic, reducing and humid, respectively.) This project in materials research fulfills the program objectives of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling leading experts in the United States and Eastern Europe to combine complementary talents and pool research resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence.//

		6( 70 ). The primary objective of this U.S.-Hungary research project between Dr. Leon Chua of the University of California, Berkeley, and Dr. Tamas Roska of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences' Computer and Automation Research Institute is to investigate mixed-mode nonlinear computing structures. Efforts will include three areas of emphasis: 1) determining the qualitative relationships between analog and digital realizations of canonical nonlinear information processing architectures; 2) simulating the quantitative problems of nonlinear programming circuits and cellular neural networks; and 3) furthering functional design of a mixed-mode nonlinear processing element to exploit analog dynamics and logical decisions. Results are expected to extend nonlinear circuit theory and may lead to a better undertanding of the operational limits of existing digitally-realized networks and new nonlinear analog and mixed-mode computing. This project in computer science fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling leading experts in the United States and Eastern Europe to combine complementary talents and pool research resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence.

		7( 77 ). Hurricane Hugo struck the coast of South Carolina just after midnight on Friday, September 22, 1989. The eye of the hurricane came ashore just north of Charleston, SC and moved northward through the state to Charlotte, NC. Hugo's landfall was near the Baruch Institute's coastal field facility and the North Inlet Long Term Ecological Research (LTER) site. The site received extensive storm damage and a tidal surge that was 4 meters above mean high tide. Salt marsh ecosystems and their adjacent coastal forests have evolved under a regime of gradually rising sea level. A major hurricane such as Hugo may occur only 1-3 times per century. And this kind of disturbance may trigger sudden expansion of marsh into forested areas. To assess the short and long term effects of Hurricane Hugo, researchers at the University of South Carolina will: 1. Map the spatial distribution and elevation of the storm surge in the forested portion of the North Inlet ecosystem. And they will gather information on the storm surge height and the deposition of Spartina detritus (wrack) and marsh mud in the forest floor. 2. Map ground water salinity in forest soils, changes in soil and ground water chemistry, and relate this information to tree mortality and other changes in vegetation. 3. Establish study sites where decomposition of wrack and its effect on underlying soil can be studied. 4. Acquire low altitude, false-color infrared aerial photographs and multispectral Thematic Mapper (satellite) images to document geomorphic and botanical changes caused by Hugo. Follow-up photographs and satellite imagery should be made several times during the next several years to detect changes and recovery of the ecosystem. Work on effects of large disturbances such as Hurricane Hugo address important issues about the response, resilience, and recovery of complex coastal ecosystems. Information gathered by this research should provide data on mechanisms of salt marsh expansion and forest recession in response to salinity and wind stresses. And the work should provide valuable landscape level information on the response of the North Inlet LTER ecosystem to a major disturbance. Dr. Gardner is a very experienced and productive scientist who is well qualified to conduct and direct this research on the impacts of Hurricane Hugo on the North Inlet ecosystem. He will be assisted by Co-Principal Investigators, Kjerfve, Blood, Michener, and Williams. Although the Baruch Institute's field facilities were destroyed by Hugo, field research has continued. In particular, sampling transects and established piezometer networks facilitate the objectives of this research. The University of South Carolina has excellent facilities to support this research effort.

		8( 111 ). This research will examine the understudied area of rural to rural migration in a developing society. It will address the problem of peasant migration into protected forests by investigating two related questions. First, since the development and transformation of peasant classes is one of the most central social dynamics in Thai peasant life, what is the relationship between this development of peasant classes and the movement of farmers out of the fertile core agricultural areas into marginal areas, particularly national forests, where the land is not as productive? Secondly, how has Thai state policy shaped this process of class formation and migration, specifically those state policies concerned with land tenure? By understanding the social and economic sources of migration at both a micro- and macro-level this research could then be applied, in Thailand and elsewhere, to help develop state and local policies that would take into account the often conflicting needs of the individual farmer and the needs of the country as a whole.

		9( 125 ). This is a three.year collaborative project between David Fossan of the State University of New York at Stony Brook and Richard Casten of Brookhaven National Laboratory and Zhang Jingye of the Lanzhou Institute of Modern Physics, Lanzhou, China. This project is sponsored jointly by NSF and the Chinese Academy of Sciences. Professor Zhang is a leading nuclear structure theorist active in worldwide research at the Niels Bohr Institute of the University of Copenhagen and the Joint Institute for Heavy Ion Research at Oak Ridge. His visits with the experimental groups at SUNY Stony Brook and Brookhaven National Laboratory will focus on three research areas that involve theoretical interpretation and guidance of the experimental programs. The three research areas are: (1) nuclear shapes, (2) the source of nuclear collectivity, and (3) dynamic properties. The first area relates to the influence that specific nucleon orbitals have on the shape of the nucleus, the second to the role of the neutron. proton interaction in the onset of collective motion in the nucleus, and the third to transitions from a specific region of stability involving rotational motion to another region. The key to this program is the effective interaction between the experimental and the theoretical approaches to the understanding of these research areas.

		10( 204 ). The Konza Prairie Research Natural Area was established in 1970 using replicated watershed units to study the effects of fire frequency on tallgrass prairie. Seastedt and Benning propose to take advantage of this long-term fire frequency experiment with a retrospective analysis of indices of net primary production (NPP) using remote sensing and Geographic Information System procedures. They will test the hypotheses that 1) fire frequency has measurable effects on remotely sensed indices of foliage NPP, 2) that topoedaphic effects influence watershed patterns, and 3) that growing season precipitation mediates fire frequency effects. The results from this effort will be combined with small plot studies to modify the CENTURY model so that it accurately predicts fire effects on NPP and soil dynamics. This research addresses an important part of vegetation - atmosphere interactions and is related to the problem of detecting effects of global change on biotic processes. The institutional support for this research is outstanding.

		11( 212 ). PI will collect and analyze a series of bulk molluscan skeletal samples contained within the sediment along an established transect in Salt River Bay, St. Croix, U.S. Virgin Islands. These samples will be compared in detail with a corresponding suite of samples collected from the same locality just prior to the passage of Hurricane Hugo, and will provide a unique opportunity to assess directly the impact of a major storm on several aspects of post-mortem skeletal alteration and transport. Research will assess the role of storms in the formation of sedimentary strata and fossil accumulations.


	Top Words:
		1. HUGO
		2. AURORAL
		3. HURRICANE
		4. RURAL
		5. MITIGATION


Cluster 2

	Documents:
		1( 4 ). The principal investigator will conduct research on problems which intersect various branches of probability theory including the classical theory of partial sums of independent random variables, probability in Banach spaces and the theory of random sets. The major objective is to clarify and extend the understanding of three related probabilistic topics which are of both theoretical and applied interest: 1) approximate the distribution of sums of independent real valued random vectors and their accompanying self-normalized sums; 2) asymptotic theory of partial maxima of independent and identically distributed sample continuous processes; 3) unions of independent or dependent random sets and models for growth. The first two topics have potential applications to statistics, while the third topic has potential applications to biology. The work will be conducted with collaborators.

		2( 6 ). Discrete pattern matching includes a large class of problems of pattern matching over discrete domains. These problems are driven by several applications, mostly in the areas of molecular biology and information retrieval. There are several features that are common to most of these problems. The input is usually a sequence, a set of sequences, a set of integer-weighted sequences, or even a graph of sequences, over a finite alphabet. The goal of the problem is to identify common patterns (i.e., a subsequence or a set of subsequences) that satisfy several constraints and/or optimize several objectives. The problems differ not only by the constraints and objectives, but also by the type of input. This project mainly concerns algorithmic questions in discrete pattern matching. The investigators will identify important problems, develop new algorithms for a variety of problems, find common algorithmic techniques, and study relationships among different problems. The emphasis will be on four kinds of problems which are identified by their domains: sequence comparisons, which involve problems of finding large common subsequences of two (or more) sequences; pattern-sequence comparisons, which involve finding more complicated patterns, such as regular expressions of sequences, in given sequences; pattern matching in hypertext systems, which generalizes the previous problems to "hyper- sequences" or, in other words, pieces of sequences connected by links; and hierarchical pattern matching, which involves finding patterns over domains that are by themselves patterns obtained from other matches.

		3( 9 ). Work on two kinds of nonclassical states is proposed. The first are states whose phase is correlated with their ampli- tude. States of this kind can be detected by measuring their noise after they have passed through a Kerr medium. The objective is to develop a formalism for describing the phase/amplitude correlations for such states. The second set of states to be studied are the so called squeezed states. In particular, those states which are squeezed in the mode ampli- tudes (quadratic squeezing). Three basic forms of quadratic squeezing have already been examined and it is proposed to study the nature of mixed forms of these states. Here, non-linear interactions can transform different types of quadratically squeezed states among themselves. These trans- formations will be studied in some detail in the proposal.

		4( 11 ). The investigator will study several topics in set theory, primarily concerning the core model and its applications. The major aim is to generalize the core model, first to include everything up to Woodin cardinals, and then to include Woodin cardinals as well. Preliminary results have revealed the probable structure of this core model, and the main remaining problem is to find a condition on the extenders in the core model which will ensure that iterated ultrapowers of the core model are well-founded. Other problems include questions related to the singular cardinal hypothesis, to infinitary Ramsey theory, and to the existence of definable cofinal sequences witnessing the singularity of an infinite singular cardinal. Set theory is usually considered the foundation of all mathematics, so studies of this kind are in a sense exploring the limits of mathematical possibility. What axioms about sets can be trusted as a sound foundation? What economies of proof can be achieved by using stronger set theoretic assumptions? Questions such as these are the motivating forces of this and other projects in set theory.

		5( 20 ). Appoaches to acquiring problem-solving knowledge have focused on achieving general results with simple problem domains. These domains have had small search spaces, few subgoal interactions, and only Boolean constraints. Real-world application domains have many subgoal interactions, large search spaces, and real- valued performance constraints as well as Boolean constraints. SteppingStone is a new general learning problem solver for solving difficult real-world problems. SteppingStone solves these problems by decomposing them into simpler subproblems, and then learning to deal with the interactions that arise between them. An initial version of our approach demonstrates this in the classical tile-sliding domain. This work will extend the system and demonstrate its capability in real-world problem- solving situations such as VLSI design and job-shop scheduling. By experimenting with both classical problem-solving domains and real-world aplications it will demonstrate that the problem solver is both powerful and general.

		6( 28 ). The topics of investigation range over a wide spectrum in probability and statistics. They include probability problems arising from Computer Science, random trees, asymptotic theory of prediction regions and of confidence regions, distances between empirical processes and their Gaussian counterparts, minimum distance methods, stochastic estimation procedures, inference for time series with infinite variance, non-parametric function estimation, set statistics, and contour estimation. Many of the studies will be computer intensive.

		7( 33 ). This research is concerned with problems in abelian group theory and in the theory of modules over commutative domains. Several problems on Butler groups will be considered, as well as problems on the torsion product of groups. The principal investigator will also investigate modules over valuation domains. An in-depth study of modules over general domains will be undertaken with special emphasis on the situation when the field of quotients has projective dimension 1. This project has its roots in the theory of abelian groups. Abelian groups are algebraic objects having a commutative multiplicative operation. They arise in a number of areas of mathematics. This research has two basic thrusts. One may have implications for commutative algebra; the second involves the use of logical techniques in the study of abelian groups.

		8( 39 ). The research proposed here is a continuation of the previous grant, aimed at understanding the statistical mechanics and dynamics of a variety of surfaces and interfaces. There are various interesting and fundamental issues, relevant to many different fields that remain to be probed. Most of these questions fall into the following broad categories: (1) Random Manifolds, such as polymers and membranes, obtained from embeddings in a higher dimensional space. (2) Evolving interfaces, such as a growing crystal facet, swelling gel, or a flowing sandpile. (3) Interfaces and Paths in Random Media are relevant to studies as diverse as the trapping of flux lines in a dirty superconductor, to the interference of Feynman paths in a doped semiconductor.

		9( 49 ). This study will address two substantive questions about a mathematical model relating affect and identity in affect- control theory. First, the dissertation student will test hypotheses derived from affect-control theory. Second, she will extend the affect-control theory model by examining the implications of her study for interaction potential, or the probability that two people will choose to interact. The project will consist of two experiments using data collected from undergraduate volunteers.

		10( 57 ). Experimental investigations of doubly excited states of the two-valence-electron atom Ba will be carried out. First, such states with highly correlated motions will be investigated, by observing correlations in energy levels, oscillator strengths, and decay mechanisms. Second, a high power picosecond laser will be used to excite doubly excited states to determine the extent to which excitation occurs in neutral Ba before it decays into an ion and an electron, and to observe the interplay between intermediate and final autoionizing resonances on the process.

		11( 58 ). This research includes studies of: nuclear structure primarily oriented toward exploration of collective multi- photon level-multiplets, such as quadrupole-quadrupole, quadrupole-octupole, and octupole-octupole multiplets; mixed symmetry states called into notice by the Interacting Boson Model in which protons and neutrons are in different boson bases, with different energies and different residual interaction strengths, neutron scattering as a probe of the strong, specific differences in electric quadrupole excitations seen by neutrons as opposed to other hadrons or leptons; and astrophysics-related reactions important to an eventual Bromine solar neutrino detector, and the Iodine reactions leading to Xenon, relevant to another and potentially more powerful neutrino detector.

		12( 59 ). Over the last decade statistical data and inference have played an important role in establishing the basic facts used for public policy, e.g.estimating the prevalence of AIDS or HIV infection, determining the risk of cancer from occupational or environmental exposures, assessing changes in the income distribution and in the legal setting, e.g. tax assessment inequality. The purpose of this project is to study statistical problems arising in these contexts and to develop appropriate probability models and statistical methodology for their solution. Research on procedures for estimating the prevalence of a rare disease which preserve anonymity by combining individual samples into batches prior to testing is a major goal. These methods should enable health specialists to obtain the cooperation of the public as infected individuals and non- infected persons who are misclassified (false positive) will not be identified. Robust methods which lead to statistically valid inferences when several scientifically plausible models may underlie the data or when a few observations may be erroneous will continue to be emphasized. Recent legal decisions in the equal employment area have raised new questions concerning the measurement of discrimination. It is planned to investigate the statistical approaches used in Watson v. Fort Worth Bank and to examine the implications of the Ward's Cove case for more refined data and methods of analysis. Related problems arising in legal and economic applications, e.g. the analysis of group data, also will be investigated.

		13( 69 ). Columbia University hosts two Theory Days annually, one in the spring and one in the fall. Each theory day consists of four one-hour invited talks on current research results. In addition, there is ample time for questions and informal discussions on a range of theoretical topics. Typically 100-150 people attend. This project supports four theory days, beginning with the Spring 1990 theory day.

		14( 76 ). The principal investigator will continue his work relating various measures of dimension (e.g. Hausdorff and packing measures) to fractal objects of probabilistic origin (specific stochastic processes). The investigator wishes to extend the theory in two directions: firstly, to subsets of the d dimensional lattice and random walks on this lattice; and secondly, to the study of the sample paths of measure valued diffusions. Since recent developments in physics in which ideas involving fractals and their dimension play a prominent role, the work could have important implications for physicists.

		15( 82 ). This renewal of Dr. Davis' previous grant, IRI-8801529, will support further development of his logic-based representation for commonsense spatial and perceptual reasoning. Past efforts have developed a theory of qualitative spatial and physical reasoning for predicting interactions of moving objects and behaviors of kinematic chains. New work will focus on a strategic planner for simulated and real robots, with emphasis on the use of knowledge in planning of perceptual actions.

		16( 95 ). The principal investigator will work in three areas of probability theory and statistics. The first is the area of probability inequalities and their statistical applications, including models of positive and negative dependence, correlation inequalities, prophet inequalities for dependent variables and certain combinatorial inequalities. The second area is that of limit theorems for graph-related, dependent random variables, with motivation from neural network models and statistics. The last area involves statistical problems in neural networks, e.g., the problem of choice of network size (dimension) allowing for both efficient learning and generalization, which appears to be related to the problem of model selection and overfitting for statistical data.

		17( 103 ). This work seeks to examine people's psychological and physiological reactions to the extreme stress produced by a recent natural disaster, the Bay Area earthquake of 17 October 1989. The PI has developed a theory of inhibition and confrontation with stressors, which holds that when people attempt to suppress reactions to stressful events, when they refuse to talk about the event, consciously try to stop thinking about it, etc., they put themselves at risk for later, stress related reactions, which can include the intrusion of debilitating thoughts, autonomic nervous system activity and, over time, an increase in health problems. In the first study, a sample of Bay Area residents will be surveyed repeatedly over the course of a year (via telephone), and sequential measures of their reaction to the earthquake will be taken. It is predicted that people will differ in the ways they inhibit, or confront, the disaster, and these reactions, in turn, will have implications for later physical health status. In addition the researchers will interview a subsample of the telephone survey respondents, and take a series of noninvasive physiological measures (e.g., blood pressure), to determine potential relationships between reactions to the earthquake (as evidenced on the survey questionnaire) and physiological status. Also, approximately 700 Bay Area residents (and a comparison group of 350 Dallas, TX, residents) will be surveyed over the course of the coming year to determine possible changes in people's reactions to, and perceptions of, the disaster; comparison of these responses with those of the repeatedly measured group will be made to determine the effects of multiple testing. In addition, health status measures also will be taken. Finally, various college and non-college groups who differ in terms of their plans to stay or quit the Bay Area also will be interviewed, and various health status measures will be applied. The research will attempt to show that the form of people's reaction to a disaster, and possibly the reactions they exhibit over a period of time following the disaster, will have implications for their psychological and physical health. The PI's use of the Bay Area disaster as a natural manipulation is a smart and opportunistic attempt to make a positive gain from a terrible catastrophe. A rapid NSF response to this request would have been very difficult without the SGER program. For this reason alone, the SGER initiative is to be applauded.

		18( 104 ). This research involves convexity-related inequalities and positive dependence in statistics. The related areas in statistics include multivariate analysis, reliability theory, multiple decision problems, and statistical computing. The mathematical tools to be used are convexity, majorization theory, conditioning and mixture of distributions. The research will provide a partial ordering of positive dependence among random variables via multivariate majorization. The effects of positive dependence in system reliability theory will be explored. Open problems in optimal-partitioning inequalities will be studied and a comparison of statistical experiments via positive dependence will be made.

		19( 108 ). This research provides surrogate statistical models for the usually deterministic output of complex computer models which cannot be directly explored in great detail because of their size and limitations on the number of runs. The models are based on a set of runs at selected inputs to aid in predicting the output at untried inputs, optimizing characteristics of the output, identifying important input factors and tuning the model to physical data. The strategies will be devised in the context of large numbers of input factors. The ingredients will include methods to select inputs (statistical experimental design) and to analyze the output data through the use of stochastic process models for deterministic outputs. Supercomputing power will be necessary to treat large numbers of factors and to extract the most out of an expensive-to-collect set of runs from computer models that themselves may run on supercomputers. A cross- disciplinary atmosphere will be maintained to stimulate the formulation of relevant problems with applicable solutions.

		20( 123 ). This research is on theory and implementation of VLSI chips for a neural type cell in the nodes of a neural network. The design is based on the model of transmission of information from the human eye to the visual cortex. The technique for implementing the model is pulse coded neural type circuits. A theory is being developed to explain the relationship between the frequency generated by neural type circuits and the input voltage level. Neural type cells are being designed, fabricated, and measured to test the theory and verify designs.

		21( 128 ). The subject of this research is to investigate the basic physics of polymer gels, in particular their moleculer and microscopic structure, the kinetics of gelation, and the diffusion of particles and polymers in gels. The problem of probe diffusion in gels has a direct bearing on the practical problems of electrophoresis, and on the fundamental problem of polymer diffusion in random media. The primary experimental tools that will be used are static and dynamic laser light scattering. An investigation of the vibrational dynamics of gels using inelastic neutron scattering and Raman spectroscopy is also proposed. The experimental work will be complemented by computer simulations of gels. This effort should lead to a better understanding of the properties gels as materials.

		22( 134 ). Mixing rate problems concern the rate of convergence in distribution of a Markov process to its stationary distribution. The motivation for this research is Monte Carlo sampling from a complicated combinatorial object X. If one can construct a process with state space X and stationary distribution uniform on X, and if one can show that the process converges in distribution to that stationary distribution rather rapidly, the simulation of the process allows simulation of points nearly uniformly distributed in X. This technique can give accurate polynomial-time probabilistic approximations to problems. This research will focus first on two cases of this kind of problem. This first is generating a point at random from a convex polytope. The second is generating a random sample path of a self-avoiding random walk. Covering problems concern the time taken by a stochastic process to visit all of the collection of subsets of its state space. Typically the process is a random walk on a finite graph, and interest is in the time taken to visit all vertices. This work will concentrate on aspects of covering times other than bounds on expected values, particularly tail probabilities.

		23( 137 ). This is a proposal to build cost-effective specialized computers for scientific computation. A set of hardware and software will be developed to allow rapid construction of very specialized computers: computers that are capable of running exactly one program. The computers are built from many data path parts, interconnected to reflect the control flow of the program to be executed. Several of these computers are under construction for different problems, including the n-body problem of predicting planetary motions, some electronic simulation problems, and large-scale particle simulations. Comparison with other computational approaches to this problem will allow an accurate evaluation of this technique.

		24( 146 ). The principal investigator will continue his work in the general area of empirical processes, paying particular attention to the development of asymptotic techniques that can be applied to non-standard problems in Statistics and Econometrics. Specific applications will include: the theory of least absolute deviations estimators in time series models; discrete choice models; and the extension of empirical process results for independent variables to cover various types of dependent variables.

		25( 148 ). This award will provide support to a group from Southeastern Massachusetts University to pursue their research in elementary particle physics. They are involved in a diverse program at Brookhaven National Laboratory to study the basic constituents of matter, quarks and gluons. The experiments are performed with a large particle detector known as the multiparticle spectrometer for which the SMU physicists have made important contributions to the apparatus and are now involved in the data analysis. The newest of these experiments is a major program in hadron spectroscopy designed to detect multiple gamma final states for the search and the unambiguous identification of various meson states.

		26( 149 ). This project is concerned with two problems in quadratic form theory. The first concerns the existence of composition laws for sums of squares. The second problem considers the connections between the behavior of quadratic forms over a field of characteristic different than two and the types of Galois groups which can arise over that field. This project is related to the classical study of quadratic forms. One of the early achievements in this field is the discovery by Gauss that every positive whole number is the sum of four squares. This area is important not only in pure number theory but in geometry and the mathematics of relativity.

		27( 150 ). This award supports cooperative research in chemical process control to be conducted by Ahmet Palazoglu of the University of California at Davis and Jose Ramagnoli of the Chemical Engineering Pilot Plant of CONICET in Bahia Blanca, Argentina. The primary object of this collaborative effort is to develop design and analysis methods for robust process control systems. With increasing demands on product quality, contraints on process economics and stringent environmental regulations, automatic control has undeniably become and integral pat of chemical process operations. However, reliable under various operating regimes and demand that the controllers respond to such variations without loss of performance or stability characteristics. The methods developed through this collaboration will be tested on various applications. The U. S. investigators have already investigated a high purity distillation column model to demonstrate the uncertainty characterization by various methods. The dynamic model of double effect high purity column has also been developed and its behavior has been tested under multi-loop PI control. The research team in Argentina has studied the singular value and the structured singular value concepts in characterizing model uncertainty for chemical processes. These two groups have complementary expertise in the area of robust control of linear and nonlinear process. Demonstrated by a number of publications, the two linear process. Demonstrated by a number of publications, the two groups have investigated the use of various representations of the model/plant mismatch and arrived at design and analysis methods. The UC Davis group emphasizes the use of mag- nitude/phase information as well as its extensions to highly structured cases. In terms of applications, the UC Davis group developed rigorous dynamic models of high purity distillation systems while the Argentines work with triple effect evaporators and fixed-bed reactors, including pilot plant studies. Development of robust control strategies ultimately benefits processing industries in both countries by assisting them to operate process units with more confidence under tight control situations.

		28( 152 ). An Elzone (Model 180XY) Particle Size Analyzer will be purchased. The system produces precise and detailed grain-size data and will have an immediate impact on both current and planned research projects by the principal investigator. These include: 1) an ATM study of the stratigraphic and geochronologic controls on sedimentation in Lake Turkana, Kenya; 2) an ongoing study of contourite deposition in Lake Superior; 3) a study of sediment dynamics in the Great Lakes by Notre Dame's Environmental Research Station.

		29( 157 ). This dissertation proposal examines the consequences of tourism for restructuring regional economies and polities, through a study of elite sponsorship of the traditional art of an indigenous group. Using models from the sociology of culture and organizational theory, the student will identify the causes and consequences of the Indian Arts Fund's sponsorship of a revival of traditional Pueblo pottery production in New Mexico in the 1920s and 1930s.

		30( 164 ). This project involves research in ergodic theory. Ergodic theory in general concerns understanding the average behavior of systems whose dynamics is too complicated or chaotic to be followed in microscopic detail. Under the heading "dynamics" can be placed the modern theory of how groups of abstract transformations act on smooth spaces. In this way ergodic theory makes contact with geometry in its quest to classify flows on homogeneous spaces. Professor Ratner is a world leader in ergodic theory. She will continue her work on the "rigidity" of unipotent subgroups of connected Lie groups. In particular, she will attempt to prove a conjecture of Raghunathan which states that every such subgroup is "algebraic". Such a result would have important implications for the diverse fields of ergodic theory, geometry, and number theory.

		31( 174 ). Chemical Interactions and structural features of organic groups in polymer interfaces will be studied in detail by a combination of synthesis of thin-film model interface structures and application of several spectroscopic techniques. The most significant interactions of interest are weak, chemically specific bonds, particularly Bronsted acid-base interactions involving functional groups such as carboxylic acid, amide, amine, hydroxyl, ester, and ketone. Model organic/organic interfaces will be constructed that place polymer overlayers of monolayer thicknesses in contact with a planar substrate functionalized with organized arrays of polar organic groups of well-defined orientations. Polymer overlayers will be formed by equilibrium-like solution deposition. Characterization of the molecular structures and chemical interactions will be monitored primarily (but not exclusively) by infrared vibrational spectroscopy, optical spectroscopic ellipsometry, and quartz crystal microgravimmetry. The data will be quantitatively analyzed for the number of interactions between groups at the interface, the orientations and conformations of the groups and the polymer backbone units, the overall morphology of the film (density variations and topography) and the thermodynamics of the adsorption process. Conclusions will be drawn accordingly as to correlations between the initial substrate surface, polymer chain structure, and the final interfacial structures. In the long term, such work should contribute to accurate prediction of interfacial behavior and properties of adsorbed polymer films, and should provide well-defined systems for tests theory.

		32( 180 ). The best current programs for two-person perfect information games play only a single game; they search exhaustively and they do not learn. The goals of this project are to demonstrate further the viability of a weak theory as a search paradigm and to facilitate the construction of computers that learn entire categories of tasks, rather than requiring individualized instruction. This research develops a program, HOYLE, that can play any such game correctly and, with experience, can learn to play it extremely well. Instead of extensive search, HOYLE learns a search control strategy for each new game under the guidance of its weak domain theory: a combination of procedural knowledge about game playing, declarative knowledge about specific games, a language and framework for strategic elements, and a set of narrow but expert perspectives called Advisors. As it plays a new game, HOYLE selectively constructs, organizes, and reformulates a knowledge base for each game from its playing experience. Under a novel architecture that employs a variety of control strategies for move selection, HOYLE combines that knowledge base with its Advisors to produce a coherentr, incisive, steadily improving strategy for the game. A prototype of this multifaceted learning has proved itself remarkably effective in a varied but limited domain. HOYLE addresses, both in its design and in its implementation, important questions in theory formation, collaboratin of experts, conflict resolution, experimental design, and operationalization.

		33( 185 ). The principal investigator will develop inferential techniques for problems where it is thought the spatial locations of the data are an important component of the assumed stochastic model. Three specific problems are considered: (1) spatial prediction and regional mapping, (2) modeling and inference for (marked) point processes, and (3) tumor-growth modeling based on random sets. Both theoretical and applied statistical issues are addressed: new spatial stochastic models will be built, parameter estimators will be developed, inference results for those estimators will be proved, and scientific applications on real data will be featured. This work will have impact on various fields such as earth sciences, geography, oceanography, hydrology, and environmetrics.

		34( 186 ). The research in mathematical statistics is divided into three parts: testing for overdispersion in discrete distributions, testing that a sample comes from a normal distribution rather than a finite mixture of normal distributions, and semi-parametric estimation of a mixed normal density. A new test will be constructed for the presence of a mixture. Also a new test and diagnostic for the number of components in a mixture will be derived. This will be achieved by exploiting the geometry of ratios of mixed and unmixed densities. A further goal is to estimate the mixed normal density using an approach in which a smoothing parameter is selected via cross- validation.

		35( 206 ). This is a program of research on several topics in combinatorial optimization with the objective of enhancing understanding of the underlying mathematics of some combinatorial problems. The importance of the research lies in the fact that a better understanding of the mathematics associated with these problems (most of them belonging to the class of nonpolynomial- complete or hard problems) can be used in the design of algorithms that solve and prove optimality of medium to large instances that typically arise in real world applications. The research includes investigation of the properties of 0, 1 matrices, whose associated set packing polytope has integer extreme points, and the facial structure of some combinatorial polytopes associated with connectivity and partitioning problems on graphs. The algorithmic issues associated with the detection of violated constraints for such problems will be investigated. The problem area of combinatorial optimization is very important, a breakthrough in this area would be highly leveraged.

		36( 217 ). The principal investigator will study the inference problems in the setting of asymptotic structures for dependence, distribution tails and characteristic functions. This research will be carried out in several general areas, including extremes of stationary sequences, partial sums of a stationary sequence and nonparametric function estimation. A number of new techniques will be developed, including the use of Fourier analysis to determine rates of convergence in nonparametric function estimation.

		37( 227 ). Research will be conducted on the subject of generalized linear regression models which are extensions of classical statistical regression and analysis-of-variance models, providing a unified approach to the analysis of counted, categorical, and response-time data. The work will focus on methods for dealing with random errors in explanatory variables, and methods allowing for more random variation in response variables than is consistent with natural generalized linear models such as the binomial or Poisson. The two problems are closely related since errors in explanatory variables induce additional variation in response variables. Methods to be analyzed have been developed for non-normally distributed data and find application in radiation dose-response analyses for survivor data where there is substantial uncertainty in individual exposure estimates.

		38( 244 ). Professor Iozzi will conduct research in the application of ergodic theory to the study of group actions on manifolds or more generally on measure spaces. In particular she will apply techniques from this area, as well as methods of representation theory and the theory of algebraic groups, to a variety of questions involving connected transformation groups and their discrete subgroups. Examples of such questions are invariance phenomena for geometric structures and related issues on the compactification of algebraic varieties, orbit equivalence of actions, and the structural study of the diffeomorphism group of a manifold. This project involves research in ergodic theory. Ergodic theory in general concerns understanding the average behavior of systems whose dynamics is too complicated or chaotic to be followed in microscopic detail. Under the heading "dynamics" can be placed the modern theory of how groups of abstract transformations act on smooth spaces. In this way ergodic theory makes contact with geometry in its quest to classify flows on homogeneous spaces.

		39( 252 ). The research on this grant concerns the global structure theory for arbitrary infinite semigroups. Applications will be given to formal languages, infinite group theory, and decision problems. The mathematical development will consist of the following: general machinery, the kernel of a morphism between semigroups, expansions, the prime decomposition theorem for arbitrary semigroups and applications. This research is in the area of semigroups. A semigroup is one of the simplest of the abstract mathematical structures, consisting of a set with one associative operation on it. The structure of these very general objects will be investigated. Applications will be given to various areas of mathematics and computer science.

		40( 259 ). Most transportation actions regarding disaster conditions cannot be tested or evaluated in a laboratory or inferred from normal situations. They have to be acquired through real-life events which in the case of an earthquake is a rare occurrence. The most significant events in the transportation and transportation related-field that followed the October 17, 1989 San Francisco Bay Area earthquake is the collapse of transportation facilities, particularly bridges, which caused discontinuity in the transportation network. These failures impacted several emergency management functions such as search and rescue, fire fighting and site evacuations. They also restricted the movement of people and goods among the various communities of the Bay Area. The main focus of this project is to study and assess the impacts of transportation system failures on emergency management functions and to evaluate the development and implementation of various traffic diversion strategies carried to provide accessibility and mobility to the travelers in the affected region. The developed strategies and models will enhance the work conducted after the Mexico City earthquake in this field, and test its applicability to the U.S. environment. The results will assist emergency managers and planners in the location and allocation of personnel and equipment, in the dispatch of emergency vehicles, and in the development of traffic diversion strategies that will avoid bottlenecks and minimize delays. They will also bring into focus the tremendous transportation costs incurred by business as well as by individuals as a result of the failure of key elements of the transportation network.

		41( 262 ). Adaptive IIR filters can be useful in many signal processing and communication applications. However, a number of important issues concerning their robust design needs to be resolved before they can be widely used. This research addresses some of those issues. In particular, it deals with: 1) Exhaustive study of the properties of signed adaptive IIR filters, with special emphasis on the development of design tools and guidelines to ensure their robust performance. 2) Design of adaptive IIR filters which are time varying. Both slow and fast time variations will be considered. 3) Development of formal methodologies for designing error filters for a range of adaptive algorithms. The resolution of the above issues will contribute to the basic understanding of issues linked to good adaptive filter performance and lead to the development of design tools for a spectrum of applications.

		42( 263 ). This research is devoted to the study of choice of the form of the statistical regression function in terms of the exogenous variables in the model when the number of exogenous variables is large. The common practice is to impose conditions such as linearity or additivity to avoid the difficulties associated with sparse data in high dimensions. Estimates of average derivative functionals will be used to select or reject a particular restriction on the form of the regression. The functionals considered are of integral type which may allow their estimation at the usual parametric rate. Estimators of these functionals which are based on kernel density estimators will be considered and their large sample properties analyzed. These estimators will then be used to test various hypotheses concerning the form of the regression function. The finite sample behavior of the proposed estimators and tests will be studied using constructed and real data. Under certain conditions these estimators will be studied for their use in identifying projection directions in projection pursuit regression. Similar functionals closely resembling the Fisher information matrix will be used to determine directions in projection pursuit density estimation.

		43( 269 ). The purpose of this research is to develop a novel, efficient technique of noncontacting laser phased array generation of ultrasound, for the nondestructive evaluation (NDE) of solids and processes. The new technique uses an array of laser beams in place of a single beam. The research will include a basic study to evaluate the performance of and develop an analytical model for the phased array. Specific applications to noncontact NDE on-line control of the depth of penetration and porosity during a gas metal arc welding (GMAW) process will be pursued. An electromagnetic acoustic transducer will be used as a noncontact receiver. The research has five phases as follows: (1) development of an analytical model for predicting the generation of ultrasound by a laser phased array; (2) experimental verification of the model for the phased array; (3) application of phased array to noncontact NDE on-line control of the depth of weld pool penetration and porosity; (4) development of an analytical model for propagation of sound through the weld pool; and (5) development of the data acquisition system and algorithms. The information on weld pool penetration and porosity extracted from the ultrasonic signal will be used in the system feedback for the welding power-supply, current, or speed control, to achieve the desired penetration and porosity.

		44( 273 ). The principal investigator will study the problems of smoothing parameter (bandwidth) selection for nonparametric models, and order selection for linear models. Nonparametric and linear models have been used extensively in many fields. Although there are many procedures available for selecting the bandwidth or the order, it is recognized that the classical selectors are subject to large sample variation, and thus may not be very useful in practice. Recently, using the technique of Fourier analysis, the investigator proposed some stabilized procedures to reduce the variation in selecting the bandwidth for kernel regression of density estimation. This project will follow the approach recently obtained by the investigator to study the bandwidth or order selection problems for several important cases, which include boundary effects, random design points, order selection for autoregressive processes, extraction of periodic components, point processes, and robust smoothers.

		45( 280 ). Experimental studies at the organ and single vessel level suggest that hemodynamic factors play a role in angiogenesis; however, the proposed factors have not been proven to work in microvascular networks. This proposal focuses on the hypothesis that the development of mature microvascular network from the primitive neonatal vascular plexus (the process of network remodeling) is the result of gradual adaptation of vessels to local mechanical forces, such as, shear stress exerted by blood flow on the vessel wall and intravascular pressure. To test the hypothesis in cerebral tissue, experiments will be performed to study changes in intracortical and pial microvascular architecture and vascular dimensions in two to five week old rats, and to correlate some of these changes with wall shear stress, intravascular pressure and other hemodynamic variables. Subsequently, a mathematical model will be developed to test whether the architecture of intracortical microvascular networks can be predicted from the microvascular architecture of the neonate and certain properties of vascular adaptation learned from the experiments. These studies will provide important new information on the role of hemodynamic factors in the development of the cerebral microvascular bed which may influence growth and repair of cerebral tissue.

		46( 294 ). This project will develop a cognitive model addressing human learning in the domain of computer programming. Building on prior research and additional psychological studies to be carried out, the comprehension of instructional text is formulated as a problem solving process in which the goal is to construct mental models of domain entities, process principles, and problem solving heuristics. New concepts introduced in these texts may be given meaning by explaining their relation to examples presented in instruction. One major goal of this project will be to model differences among learners in the self-explanation of examples. Specifically, preliminary studies show that learners differ in the way that they explain examples to themselves, and these differences have significant correlations with subsequent programming performance. Another major goal will be to study and develop a model whereby learners reflect on their problem solving and generate new strategies. Both of these areas have received little study in cognitive science. Our results should be important to the psychology of learning in complex formal domains, the acquisition and modification of knowledge in machine learning, and instructional research.

		47( 306 ). The Principal Investigator will attack two research problems dealing with convective systems over the Amazon basin. The first is an attempt at estimation of evapotranspiration using satellite-based techniques. Evapotranspiration in the rain forest is an important component of the hydrologic cycle, but is inadequately understood in this region. This portion of the research is a continuation of work begun under a previous award. The second objective is to investigate the characteristics of convection and compare these to environmental conditions. While this has been done extensively in North America, similar studies have been lacking in South America. Such contrasting studies are useful for understanding the important physical factors for convection on both sides of the equator. The PI will use a combination of ground-based and satellite data in this research.//

		48( 328 ). This Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) has at its aim to explore the effect of electric fields on immiscible mixtures of polymers. Preliminary work has shown that phases can be distorted and aligned by this method. The planned research will investigate the mechanism by which different morphologies can be obtained, and the anisotropies in such properties as conductivity or dielectric constant in films subjected to electric fields.

		49( 347 ). Modern communication systems, for examples high speed pulse code transmission systems via satellite, impose a wide frequency band over which pulse amplitude and phase distortion must be contained within acceptable limits to preserve the integrity of the output information. The system includes many components whose mismatch, e.g. amplifiers with their fixed parasitic elements, contribute to the degradation of wide band response. Broadband equalizers must be properly inserted along the system to compensate for these inevitable mismatches that occur over the band so as to maintain low levels of distortion. This research deals with three difficult and important problems in broadband matching which are especially (though not exclusively) applicable to distributed gain-bandwidth (GBW) theory of linear passive and active 2-ports which arises in such applications as FET amplifiers where loss and internal feedback are included. Heretofore no complete analytic solution of this problem has been presented. The second considers new broadband matching methods which could give a practical approach to matching loads which are badly mismatched and/or have widely fluctuating input impedances as a function of frequency. Microwave antennas, microwave to optical device coupling structures, and microwave FET amplifiers including the parasitic elements due to packaging as well as those of the intrinsic device are typical applications. The third problem concerns gain-bandwidth performance and the design of coupling structures for multi-device distributed amplifiers using realistic models for the active devices.

		50( 369 ). Knight intends to continue to work on problems in recursive model theory, and to analyze methods for organizing and thinking about nested priority arguments. There are now several such methods: the method of "workers", developed by Harrington, two versions of "alpha-systems", both developed by Ash, and a method of Lemmp and Lerman. The method of workers and the original alpha-systems have each yielded quite a number of results in recursive model theory. Knight has a metatheorem for workers, similar to the one Ash proved for his original alpha-systems, except that not so much is assumed to be r.e., and the conditions are more complicated. Knight hopes both to simplify and to improve the metatheorem for workers. In Knight's metatheorem, as in Ash's original metatheorem, the object produced on the bottom is recursive. Ash's new alpha-systems (simpler than the old), and the method of Lemmp and Lerman, are designed to produce an r.e. object on the bottom. There are many problems in recursive model theory (existence of recursive presentations of groups, etc.), as well as in recursion theory, on which these new methods ought to yield results. Recursion theory as a topic in the foundations of mathematics is motivated by a desire to formalize the property of being computable by an algorithm. The algorithm need not be a practical one, but it must exist and terminate in principal after some finite number of steps.


	Top Words:
		1. THEORY
		2. PROBLEMS
		3. MODEL
		4. RANDOM
		5. MODELS


Cluster 3

	Documents:
		1( 25 ). Not Available

		2( 27 ). Not Available

		3( 94 ). This is an award to provide support for research on the development of an instrument that can be used to measure the velocity of water flowing in subsurface aquifers. The basis of instrument operation is the generation and observation of a migrating thermal plume in the vicinity of the heated probe. The proposed instrument will be equipped to sense the motion of groundwater by monitoring the discharge of heat from the isothermally heated cylinder to the surrounding soil as a function of location on the probe surface. Unlike presently available devices, groundwater flow is directed around rather than through the probe. This provides the instrument with the advantage of component isolation from the groundwater environment. Hence, the probe is expected to maintain excellent long term stability (years). An accurate knowledge of groundwater movement is needed as greater pressures are exerted on our available groundwater resources. The depletion and recharge of groundwater supplies as well as the migration of contaminant "plumes" through groundwater can only be predicted given a knowledge of groundwater flow characteristics. This primarily entails a complete knowledge of groundwater flow speed and direction for the zone of interest. This award was made in accord with criteria outlined in NSF 89-85, Small Grants for Exploratory Research (SGER).

		4( 102 ). Not Available

		5( 114 ). Not Available

		6( 147 ). Not Available

		7( 201 ). Not Available

		8( 213 ). Not Available

		9( 229 ). Not Available

		10( 231 ). Not Available

		11( 241 ). Not Available

		12( 293 ). Not Available

		13( 355 ). Not Available


	Top Words:
		1. AVAILABLE
		2. NOT
		3. GROUNDWATER
		4. INSTRUMENT
		5. PROBE


Cluster 4

	Documents:
		1( 23 ). This award supports a Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site proposal to provide research experiences for selected undergraduates in marine sciences, with specific emphasis on the role of the ocean in the global carbon cycle, to acquaint them with the excitement and opportunities of academic research and to encourage them to pursue graduates studies and a career in ocean sciences.

		2( 61 ). Columbia University, Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory will operate the R/V BERNIER during 1990 as a general oceanographic vessel in support of NSF-funded research projects. The R/V BERIER is a 72.5 meter (254') general research vessel with special capabilities for geophysical research. The ship was constructed in 1983 and is currently owned by the Trustees for Columbia University in the City of New York. The recently purchased R/V BERNIER will replace the R/V CONRAD which was retired in 1989. The R/V CONRAD was successfully operated and maintained by LDGO for over ten years. The R/V BERNIER will conduct operations worldwide. This vessel is part of a fleet used by the National Science Foundation to support oceanographic research projects. Most oceanographic research projects require highly specialized equipment and extensive support from a ship's crew members. An increasing number of research projects require equipment that must be permanently installed on a ship and for which the ship must be specifically designed. Such equipment also requires highly trained crew members for maintenance and operation. These vessels do not operate in the same manner as general cargo or fishing vessels, and therefore, NSF supports the operation of a variety of vessels specifically dedicated to oceanographic research. These vessels are operated by universities and research institutions around the country.

		3( 178 ). To stimulate interest and activity in mathematical research, the National Science Foundation each year supports a number of NSF-CBMS Regional Research Conferences in the Mathematical Sciences. Each five-day conference features a distinguished lecturer who delivers ten lectures on a topic of important current research in one sharply focused area of the mathematical sciences. The lecturer subsequently prepares an expository monograph based upon these lectures, which is normally published by the American Mathematical Society or the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, or jointly by the American Statistical Association and the Institute of Mathematical Statistics. Certain features differentiate these conferences from typical research conferences. These are: (1) Focus on a single important and timely area of research by a leading practitioner, (2) Continued effect and local stimulation through regional emphasis, (3) Panel review for quality, breadth, and timeliness, and (4) Published monographs for a wider audience. This grant is to the Conference Board of the Mathematical Sciences (CBMS) to help fund its activities in promoting, administering, and providing support services for the conference series.

		4( 223 ). This Engineering Research Equipment award will permit the purchase of various computer equipment components. They will be utilized in an ongoing research program involving numerical modeling in two- phase flow, turbulence, transport in porous media, and rheology of concentrated suspensions. Several investigators will share the equipment. The research areas impact various issues involving flow and transport in mechanical and chemical engineering systems.

		5( 284 ). This proposal requests support for renovation of the cineradiographic instrumentation in the Museum of Comparative Zoology. Established in 1974 with funds from the National Science Foundation and with construction provided by Harvard University, the cineradiographic facility is a unique research resource that is extensively used in experimental investigations of biomechanics, locomotion, feeding and respiration in representatives of every vertebrate class. The apparatus, which simultaneously provides cinefluorographic imagery and permanent (16 mm) film records at speed of 50 - 200 frames/second, is in urgent need of engineering overhaul and replacement of parts. Current and anticipated future use of this facility, which is essential to the future development of organismal biology, depends upon upgrading the equipment.

		6( 315 ). This is a grant under the Scientific Computing Research Equipment for the Mathematical Sciences program of the Division of Mathematical Sciences of the National Sciences Foundation. This program supports the purchase of special purpose computing equipment dedicated to the conduct of research in the mathematical sciences. This equipment is required for several research projects and would be difficult to justify for one project alone. Support from the National Science Foundation is coupled with discounts and contributions from manufacturers and with substantial cost-sharing from the institutions submitting the proposal. This program is an example of academic, corporate, and government cooperation in the support of the basic research in the mathematical sciences. This equipment will be used to support three research projects in the Department of Statistics of the University of Connecticut: sampling based methods for bayesian computation, investigator Gelfand; product-type approximations in statistics, investigator Glaz; sequential analysis and related areas, investigator Mukhopadhyay.

		7( 319 ). Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute will operate the Deep Submergence Vehicle (DSV) ALVIN during 1990 in support of NSF-funded research projects. The DSV ALVIN is a 7.1 m National Oceanographic Facility that is owned by the U.S. Navy and is jointly funded by NSF, NOAA and ONR for oceanographic research. Support for the DSV ALVIN is provided by each agency according tothe terms outlined in a joint Memorandum of Agreement. The ALVIN Review Committee, which is composed of scientists and agency representatives, provides guidance for operations of the submersible. The submersible is carried by the R/V ATLANTIS II. The support vessel and the submersible operate worldwide, and the submersible is capable of diving to a depth of 4,000 m. Operation of a submersible requires highly specialized equipment and extensive support from both the support ship's crew members and the submersible team. Crew members for the DSV ALVIN are highly trained to ensure proper maintenance and saftey for operations. The support ship is outfitted with a special A frame on the stern that allows the submersible to be safely deployed.


	Top Words:
		1. EQUIPMENT
		2. SCIENCES
		3. SUBMERSIBLE
		4. SUPPORT
		5. MATHEMATICAL


Cluster 5

	Documents:
		1( 3 ). Myxococcus xanthus development is regulated by the Csg intercellular communication system. The C signal appears to be the polypeptide product of the csgA gene. The preliminary results suggest four directions for future work. First, random mutagenesis of csgA followed by DNA sequencing of developmental mutants is expected to determine the important functional domains of the protein. Second, examination of the regulation of csgA in response to moderated levels of nutrients is expected to reveal how nutrient levels are assessed in this organism and used to regulate gene expression. This project will involve a) random mutagenesis and DNA sequencing of the regulatory region to identify nucleotides that play a critical role in regulation, b) cloning of genes encoding regulatory proteins using recognition site probes, c) characterization of the protein-DNA interactions with gel mobility shift assays and DNA foot printing, and d) quantitation of the expression levels in vivo using a reporter locus. Third, continued analysis of the csgA suppressor mutations is expected to reveal other steps in the signaling process. Several suppressor alleles have been cloned and these will be sequenced and studied by other functional assays. %%% The life cycle of the myxobacterium, Myxococcus xanthus, contains the basic elements found in the development of higher organisms including directed cell movement, multicellular morphogenesis, regulated gene expression and cellular differentiation. It can therefore serve as an experimentally accessible model for the study of these processes.

		2( 8 ). This Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) supports the research to assess the feasibility of recovering ancient microorganisms entrapped in deep glacial ice cores. A major goal will be to establish the reliability of obtaining ancient organisms for comparative studies with contemporary ogranisms. The reseach will establish valid techniques for the recovery of microorganisms from ice cores stored at the Ice Core Storage Facility in Buffalo, N.Y., and then attempt in recover viable, ancient organisms from ice cores drilled in Greenland and Antarctica. By studying successively older strata in ice cores, the longevity of different taxa entrapped in ice can be estimated. Organisms that are successfully recovered can also be used as model organisms for research on rates of biological evolution, mechanisms of dormancy, their ecological relevance and processes of natural preservation.

		3( 52 ). The objective of the proposed study is to use molecular criteria to identify obligate or synergistic associations among members of a natural anaerobic microbial biofilm community under changing environmental conditions. To achieve this objective, comparative sequencing of environmentally derived 16s ribosomal RNAs and application of phylogenetically-based hybridization probes will be used to identify and monitor the dominant members of groundwater biofilm communities that are established within laboratory bioreactor systems. In conjunction with in situ hybridization techniques, this molecular framework will be used to define interdependent relationships among community members such as those involving H2-producing bacteria (fermentative and fatty acid-and alcohol-oxidizing bacteria) and H2-consuming bacteria (methanogenic bacteria and sulfate-reducing bacteria). Bioreactor operating conditions (eg. Substrate concentration and sulfate concentration) will be altered to detect these interdependent associations by following coordinate fluctuations among selected microbial populations (using the molecular approach described above) during biofilm colonization, development and establishment of the climax community. The proposed research should provide fundamental information regarding the diversity, stability and function of natural microbial communities. Such basic information about microbial communities has thusfar been inaccessible, but constitutes the foundation for studies of microbial ecosystem perturbation and assessment of the risk associated with the release of genetically engineered microorganisms into the environment.

		4( 53 ). Living matters are sustained by large-scale cycles of energy and chemical elements, and one of the most essential elements in biological materials is nitrogen. To study the many different biological processes which govern the nitrogen status in the biosphere is, therefore, of vital importance. Nitrogenase and nitrite reductase are two enzymes which catalyze key steps in the nitrogen cycle. Nitrogenase catalyzes the conversion of atmospheric dinitrogen into ammonia (nitrogen fixation) and many microorganisms use it to assimilate nitrogen into the living system. Nitrate reductase reduces nitrite to ammonia and a variety of nitrate-reducing bacteria, as well as some sulfate reducing bacteria, use it for terminal respiration and dissimilates nitrogen back to the physical world. Structural and functional studies of these enzymes are therefore of fundamental importance and should provide information pertinent to the understanding of our living environment. In this application, Dr. Huynh proposes to perform Mossbauaer studies of the following enzymes: 1. the vanadium-iron protein of the nitrogenase enzyme system from Azotobacter vinelandii. 2. the nitrite reductase from Desulfovibrio desulfuricans. Both the vanadium-iron protein and nitrite reductase are complex enzymes containing multiple iron centers which can be most effectively studied by Mossbauer spectroscopy. The proposed experiments include (i)characterizations of the native enzymes, (ii)redoxtitration studies, (iii) pH- dependence investigations and (iv)examinations of substrate- and ligand-binding effects. The Mossbauer results will be correlated with data obtained form other physico-biochemical methods, including optical and electron paramagnetic resonance techniques. Dr. Huynh hopes to fully characterize the iron centers in these enzymes, to obtain physical and biochemical properties, to reveal the roles these iron centers play in their enzymatic functions and to enhance our understanding of the mechanisms of biological nitrogen fixation and nitrite reduction.

		5( 68 ). The proposed studies concern the mechanisms and the regulation of those mechanisms whereby the kidneys excrete water, inorganic substances, and organic substances. They involve the regulation of the rate of production of a filtrate of the blood and the mechanisms by which organic and inorganic substances are moved across renal tubule cells, either from the initial filtrate back into the blood perfusing these cells or from the blood perfusing these cells into the initial filtrate. The organic substances being studied are those that exist as positively charged molecules (primarily the exogenous nerve blocking agent, tetraethylammonium, and the endogenous product of nicotinic acid metabolism, N1-methylnicotinamide) and those that exist as negatively charged molecules (primarily the exogenous compound, p- aminohippurate, and the endogenous end product of nitrogen metabolism, urate). These studies take advantage of the relatively simple kidneys of reptiles in which the movement (or some characteristic of the movement) of some substances across the tubule cells is more pronounced than in mammals, and the complex kidneys of birds, which in part resemble the kidneys of reptiles and in part resemble the kidneys of mammals. The experimental approach is an integrative one that explores function at the membrane cell, and whole organ levels. These studies are important for understanding the way in which the kidneys permit animals to survive in specific environments and to adapt to changing environments. This understanding is particularly important in terms of adopting strategies to insure the survival of animal populations in the face of major changes in the earth's environment. Such strategies may also be important to human populations. These studies will also provide substantial insight into the way in which the kidneys in wild or domestic animals populations handle organic environmental pollutants, including many toxic compounds. This understanding applies also to human kidneys, not only in terms of normally toxic substances but also in terms of therapeutic agents that can be toxic when present in excess. Finally, these studies will provide information on the way in which the kidneys eliminate urate, an important substance in renal stone formation in humans and other animals. //

		6( 73 ). In collaboration with the Murmansk Institute of Marine Biology and Geology, USSR, this project will initiate basic glacial geologic, stratigraphic and geochronologic studies to provide new field data to independently evaluate the extent and timing of Late Weischselian and older glaciations. Field research will focus on the western part of the Franz Josef Land Archipelago, where ice-free forelands contain abundant raised marine and glacial features. High resolution SPOT satellite imagery will be used as a mapping base to determine the distribution of raised beaches, moraines and other glacial features. Geomorphic and pedologic studies will provide relative ages for a previously isostatic response will be documented by radiocarbon dating of fossils included in raised beaches of known elevation. Particular attention will be given to the recognition of glacial-diamicts and uncomformitites, the collection of micro and macro-fauna for paleenvironmental assessment, and radiocarbon dating and amino acid racemization analyses. These studies will provide new insight into the history and extent of Late Weichselian glaciations on Franz Josef Land and will provide needed data to evaluate conflicting hypotheses regarding Late Weichselian ice volumes in northern Eurasia.

		7( 75 ). This award will provide supplementary support for a long-term research stay by Dr. Barry Goodell of the University of Maine to conduct collaborative research with Drs. Koichi Yamamoto and Hitoshi Karasawa of the Forestry and Forest Products Research Institute in Tsukuba, Japan. They will study the biochemistry and molecular biology of enzymatic wood degradation. The mechanisms by which fungi penetrate and degrade wood cell walls are still incompletely understood. Dr. Goodell's laboratory has been investigating the action of degradative enzymes and metabolites using immunological probes and transmission electron microscopy. Dr. Yamamoto and Dr. Karasawa have been using the techniques of UV microspectrophotometry and scanning electron microscope-based X-ray analysis to localize and quantify lignin in the wood cell. It is hoped that collaboration will enable these researchers to establish links between enzyme/metabolite function and selective delignification.

		8( 93 ). In this study, scanning tunnelling microscopy (STM) is used in conjunction with X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy to monitor the surfaces of platinum single crystals and model graphite- supported platinum catalysts following a variety of treatments, including use of the samples as catalysts for cyclohexene aromatization. Several crystal planes are studied, including some with low and some with high Miller indices. Single-crystal studies are compared with model catalyst studies to ascertain which features of the STM scans are relevant to catalytic performance. This is essentially a baseline study to establish reliability guidelines for application of STM in catalysis research. In principle, this relatively new technique has great potential to reveal surface features in reacting systems heretofore impossible to detect.

		9( 107 ). The objective of this proposal is to demonstrate the feasibility of modifying Bacillus expression systems which will allow vegetative cells to continuously produce and secrete proteins. Very little is known about the capabilities of vegetative cells to synthesize and secrete proteins. The modified expression systems could serve as a basis for new recombinant DNA technology for efficient production of commercially important Bacillus exoenzymes and heterologous foreign proteins.

		10( 130 ). This award supports cooperative research in enzyme biochemistry between William Stahl of the University of Washington in Seattle and Marta Antonelli of the Institute of Cellular Biology in Buenos Aires, Argentina. The study will examine the role of specific sequences of isoforms of the catalytic subunit of the Na,K-ATPase in ouabain binding. One important goal is to establish whether the C-terminus of the catalytic subunit is intracelular or extracellular. In addition, a long term goal is to establish localization of isoforms with different ouabain binding characteristics by light microscope immunocytochemistry. Dr. Antonelli has support for this work at the Institute through collaboration with its Director, Jorge Saavedra's immunocytochemistry group. The have extensive experience in light and electron microscope immunocytochemistry. Their methodologies have been utilized by Dr. Stahl in his laboratory. The collaboration will provide an opportunity to make use of the excellent facilities in Argentina for localization of the Na,K-ATPase isoforms to provide insight into the structure of the cardiac glycoside binding site in different isoforms of the catalytic subunit. This is complementary to studies in Seattle on expression of mRNAs coding for isoforms with high and low affinities for cardiac glycosides. Brought together in this collaboration, these efforts will provide a broader, more comprehensive approach to understanding functional aspects of Na,K-ATPases.

		11( 216 ). This U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Research award supports cooperative research in developmental neurobiology to be conducted by Dr. Torsten Wiesel and Dr. David Sretavan of Rockefeller University and Dr. Ary Ramoa of the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. The goal of this research is to understand how precise patterns of axonal projections, present in the mature mammalian visual system, are established during development. The experiments will focus on three areas. First, is the nature of the cellular interactions between developing retinal axons and neuro- epithelial cells at the optic chiasm. Second, is the identity and spatial-temporal distribution of cell surface molecules present on both retinal axons and neuroepithelial cells. Third, is the further development and refinement of an in vitro culture system to study retinal ganglion cell axon pathfinding. Results from this set of studies will not only lead to a better understanding of how a major axon pathway in the visual system is formed during embryonic development, but will also provide insight into how specific axonal projections may arise in other parts of the central nervous system. Dr. Ramoa will bring to this project his expertise on the embryonic development of mammalian retinal ganglion cells and will also benefit by learning a powerful research technique which will be of direct use in his own research in Brazil. Dr. Ramoa's past research has focused on the development of mammalian retinal ganglion cells in terms of the maturation of their morphological features and their electrophysio- logical properties. While in the U.S., Dr. Ramoa will work with Dr. David Sretavan using hybridoma techniques to generate monoclonal antibodies directed against molecules present on developing retinal ganglion cells and the neuroepithelial cells of the optic chiasm.

		12( 361 ). This program aims to obtain basic engineering information on the kinetics of feeding, growth, and reproduction of the organism Tetrahymena pyriformis. Emphasis is placed on observing distributions of single cell properties and developing models for prediction of how such distributions change in response to changes in environmental conditions. Flow cytometry is the principal experimental tool used to obtain the desired data. This technique allows rapid and accurate determination of how various properties of single cells are jointly distributed among the many cells in a population, and it can also be used to provide quantitative information on the spatial distribution of some materials, like DNA, in a single cell.

		13( 362 ). This phase 2 SBIR proposal is concerned with a new device which utilizes a technique developed for an ink-jet writing machine. This device should allow the delivery of very small amounts of fluid in the close proximity of a cell. Cells communicate with each other by secreting chemical messengers, such as hormones and neurotransmitters and it would be important, both for theoretical and practical purposes, to be able to replicate this process. This device promises to do precisely that. If the design is successfully implemented it will be possible to deliver minute amounts of chemicals known or suspected to be cellular messengers, directly onto the surface of cells. Also, it will be possible to deliver drugs suspected to interfere with cellular communications. For this reason the device could become an important tool in the pharmaceutical industry.


	Top Words:
		1. CELLS
		2. ICE
		3. CELL
		4. EXPRESSION
		5. KIDNEYS


Cluster 6

	Documents:
		1( 2 ). This program is designed to attract undergraduate, particularly women and minorities, into lasers and optics research, with emphasis on lightwave technology as an emerging technology. Many recent studies, including the National of Academies recent report on Photonics, identify this as one of the key technical growth areas of the future. Inspiration for these students to continue into graduate school will come from participating in research projects within the interdisciplinary Center for Laser Studies. This research organization is unusual for its large percentage of women and minorities, both on its staff and in its graduate student population. In 1989 the Center received REU site funding and developed a very successful program which included three Chicanos, two females and one black student. This gives the Center a chance to better recruit minority and women undergraduates and to provide more opportunity to participate in research, inspiring them to continue in graduate students. The projects include noise properties of semiconductor arrays, characterization of nonlinear services, fabrication and characterization of heterojunction lasers, solid stat lasers, fiber- optics power-by-light headset, and thermal transport in thin films.

		2( 35 ). The fabrication of integrated circuits involves the creation of patterned, multilayer, thin film structures composed of insulators, semiconductors, and conductors. Typically, these structures are constructed by using photolithographic techniques in conjunction with additional processing steps, including chemical vapor deposition (CVD), etching, doping, etc. Some of these steps (e.g., wet etching) lack sufficient resolution for high density devices, while others (e.g., high temperatures in CVD) subject the wafer to extreme conditions that may damage underlying structures. Furthermore, patterning of thin films by lithography involves several complex processing steps (e.g. spin-on bake, expose, develop, etch, photo-resist strip) which increase the chance of defects. This has led researchers in the semiconductor industry to investigate laser processing of microelectronic devices. The repair of mask sets by depositing or etching a feature and customizing of electronic packages as other applications where laser processing is expected to have a considerable impact. Research in laser processing has resulted in an array of novel micro-chemical processing techniques. This PI's research program focuses on laser induced deposition. The process of scanning a laser beam across a substrate, causing reactants in either the gas, liquid or solid phase to react and deposit on the substrate is commonly referred to as laser direct-writing. This research project is a combined experimental and modelling study of the fundamental mechanisms underlying nonlinear morphological effects in direct laser writing of metal and semiconductor lines from spun-on metalorganic layers as well as by CVD. The experimental system consists of a microscope for focusing radiation from an argon laser onto a substrate. An x-y translation stage moves the substrate relative to the laser beam so that lines may be written. The nonlinear behavior to be investigated includes multiplicity phenomena, periodic patterns, and volcano-shaped deposits. These effects are observed over a wide range of operating conditions in a large number of applications including the deposition of gold from organogold films, silicon from silane, and yttrium- barium-copper-oxygen superconductors from spun-on metalorganic films. The overall goals of this coordinated experimental and modelling research program are to understand the underlying fundamental processes and to develop predictive models that may be used to prevent or control the nonlinear behavior. This will be critical to the further development of laser direct-write systems that will have to face new applications and meet increasingly stringent specifications on feature size in order to satisfy the needs of future microelectronics and micromechanical processing.

		3( 36 ). An investigation of quantum effects in very thin metal films and metal clusters prepared by vapor-deposition on to substrates held at liquid He temperatures. Secondly, a study of the electric and magnetic properties of selected superconducting (sc) wire network and wire proximity array geometries as models for aspects of percolation, localization, and the (sc) glass.

		4( 38 ). The University of Vermont will connect their campus network to the New England Academic and Research Network (NEARnet), a regional network which is part of the NSFNET. Direct connection to NEARnet will provide researchers with improved access to the Internet and other national networks such as CSNET/Bitnet and USENET. The proposed 1.5 million bit per second, dedicated, communication link will improve reliability, speed, turn-around, and flexibility for data communication functions such as file transfer, remote login, and teleconferencing. NEARnet will provide for equipment, maintenance, and information services. The University of Vermont will be able to integrate supercomputing and collaborative research into graduate and udergraduate curricula. In addition the State Library Services and Middlebury College will be connected to the main campus and provided connectivity to the rest of the Internet through already existing local networks. This project thus provides sharing of resources among the state institutions, greatly facilitates research by students and faculty, and provides a valuable resource to supplement course work.***

		5( 42 ). This award provides funds to the Department of Zoology at Arizona State University to establish a program to give undergraduates individual mentoring and a rewarding experience doing research on the physiological bases of behavior. All participants will integrate their work into a broad perspective encompassing both mechanisms and evolution of behavior, and all will be introduced to both laboratory and field studies. During the ten summer weeks of the program ten undergraduate students will work with six participating faculty members to design a research project, to implement it, and to report their results. Faculty and students will meet weekly as a group to discuss research in progress. Some social and cultural events are planned, in order to strengthen a feeling of collegiality. Students will be recruited nationally and selected on the basis of interest and preparation. Special efforts will be made to recruit women and minorities, the latter particularly from institutions in the southwest. This Research Experience for Undergraduates award will give 10 students a lively research experience, including opportunities to discuss their work, as well as providing incentive to enhance on-going efforts of faculty in the Department of Zoology to involve undergraduates in research.

		6( 48 ). This award supports cooperative research in physical oceanography to be conducted by Bjorn Kjerfve of the University of South Carolina in collaboration with Bastiaan Knoppers of the Universidade Federal Fluminense in Niteroi, Brazil. The work will consist of the measurement of the dynamic characteristics of the largest coastal lagoon along the Fluminense coastline. It is vital to establish a base line for lagoon dynamics before planned intense development begins. This lagoon is hypersaline, being choked off from the ocean (unlike estuaries where there is a mixing zone). Characteristics to be measured include salinity structure, sedimentation rates (runoff), wind effects, nutrient concentration, temperatures and evaporation rates and tidal dynamics. These data will be compared to those taken in other fresh and brackish water lagoons in which previous oceanographic and ecological studies have been carried out. There are coastal lagoons around the world, notably in New England and the Gulf coast of the U.S. Not all of them are in arid climates but climatic variability affects hydrological and ecological processes and the study of this hypersaline example will extend the range of such effects. It will also add to the extensive biological, chemical, geological and geographical work in progress as well as investigations in health, sociology and economics studies underway on these lagoons. Modelling and the use of this data will help develop predictive capability for linear and nonlinear processes in lagoon systems. Kjerfve's experience in hydrology and ecology will complement those of the Brazilian multidisciplinary team and in particular the biogeochemical work of Knoppers. Students will participate in the work in Brazil and some will follow this field work with Ph.D. studies in the U.S.

		7( 60 ). The following is an award to engage in research aimed at understanding and exploring experimentally the ultra high speed potential of quantum well lasers. The recent advances in quantum layer understanding and growth now make the prospects of subpicosecond pulses at rates greater than 100 GHz a distinct possibility. It is proposed to pursue this goal using our combined crystal growth (MBE, LPE), microwave, picosecond pulse, and simulation capabilities.

		8( 67 ). The following are topics to be discussed at the Optical Society of America sponsored conference on Integrated Photonics. (A) Photonic devices and circuits to guided-wave devices, circuit integration, fiber and waveguide coupling, semiconductor lasers and amplifiers, quantum well waveguide devices, signal processing and sensors. (B) Nonlinear guided- wave phenomena, nonlinear phenomena, stimulated scattering, photorefractive phenomena, multiphoton processes, squeezed states, solitons, pulse compression, third-order all optical switching phenomena, nonlinear couplers and spatial solitons, second harmonic generation and nonlinear waveguide materials. (C) Modeling, numerical simulation, and theory, modeling, numerical simulation, or theory of photonic devices and materials. (D) Physics, materials, technology, and characterization. Electrooptic, optic-optic, acoustooptic, magnetooptic mechanisms, optical interactions in semiconductor interaction between optical radiation and electrical carriers in semiconductors; new materials structures and compositions; new materials growth, diffusion, ion-exchange, etching techniques; and new techniques for characterizing photonic devices or processes or materials used to fabricate them.

		9( 83 ). The first NSF funded Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) program was in the summer of 1989 at the Center for Astrophysics and Space Astronomy (CASA). The program will continue in the summers of 1990 and 1991. The students, half drawn from the University of Colorado (CU) and half drawn from other institutions in Colorado or adjacent states, will spend ten weeks in a program designed to maximize both their educational and research experience. Students will be matched with a research project and faculty mentor prior to their arrival. The ten-week program begins with an intensive, one-week training period in which students are given a thorough overview of the facilities and research tools available at CASA, and develop a detailed research proposal to serve as a plan of action for the remaining nine weeks. Throughout the ten-week program students meet daily in a 3 credit course entitled "APAS 4010, Astrophysical Research Seminar". The course was designed expressly for the purpose of the CASA REU program; it presents students with a theoretical framework in relevant astrophysical topics, provides a wide survey of the astrophysical research at CASA, and offers advice and guidance on graduate school or future careers in astrophysics. Students are expected to present both oral and written Final Reports on their research at the end of the ten-week program. The program anticipates a progressive pattern of student activities. Students begin by participating in our summer program, in which they will develop the background and skills needed for continued research success. Following the summer program, it is hoped that students will continue with independent support to the development of a senior thesis in astrophysics, which in turn can lead into a successful graduate experience and career.

		10( 86 ). This REU site involves a twelve-week summer research program for senior undergraduates. Nine faculty will participate in the program, with research interests in biotechnology electrochemistry, interfacial phenomena, statistical thermodynamics, polymer characterization and materials science. The program will include a tutorial series on statistics, computer programming and experimental methods for analysis. A seminar series will use the resources in other departments on campus and neighboring institutions as well as researchers from local industrial and public laboratories. In this manner, the collaborative possibilities in cross-disciplinary research open to chemical engineers and the research opportunities which exist outside the university will be made known to the student. The program will conclude with a day of public seminars, where the students will present their research activity and accomplishments.

		11( 89 ). Experimental program on electromagnetic propagation in random structures. Observation of photon localization in the near future is a specific goal. Approaches include the use of both light and microwave radiation. The cross-correlation of fluctuations in intensity will be measured as a function of separation between two points. The physical systems which are employed in the experiments consist of metallic or high-index dielectric spheres imbedded in a transparant medium. Measurements will be made in the diffusive, critical, and localized regimes.

		12( 90 ). Eight students will participate in the Research Experiences for Undergraduates project aimed at algebraic studies in graph theory. Two advisors will work with the students on topics such as line graphs and their regularity properties which develop when iterated. Work will also be done in determining which graph operations commute with the line graph operator. Other students will consider the classification of graphs whose adjacency matrices have integer eigenvalues, Hamiltonian graphs which arise as joins of other graphs and determinants of distance matrices of unicyclic graphs. Included in the orientation phase, students will be introduced to the program MATLAB, a computer program particularly useful for the computational aspects of linear algebra. A full schedule of invited speakers is planned. In addition, students will be be encouraged to present the results of their work at meetings of the honorary, Pi Mu Epsilon, or those of the Mathematical Association of America.

		13( 92 ). This project provides one year of partial subsidy for the Mid- America Drosophila Stock Center. Drosophila, or "fruit flies," are essential experimental animals which are used extensively in genetics research. The Mid-America Center maintains 4,061 genetic strains of the most important fruit-fly species, Drosophila melanogaster, which are distributed to institutions around the world for research and teaching purposes. From 1985 to 1989, over 12,000 requests for flies were received and nearly 59,000 stocks were mailed to all 50 states and over 50 foreign countries. These stocks include basic mutants as well as complex mutant combinations and chromosome rearrangements. It is essential that such stocks be maintained because they represent many man-years of genetic research and are difficult, and in some cases impossible, to re- isolate or re-synthesize. In addition, it is much too expensive for each researcher utilizing Drosophila to maintain the full range of stocks it envisions it will need. It is certain that curtailment of the activities of the Mid-America Center would seriously affect genetics research worldwide.

		14( 116 ). This award will provide supplementary support to enable Dr. Elizabeth Klerman of the Harvard Medical School to conduct collaborative research for 12 months with Dr. K. Aihara of Tokyo Denki University, Japan. They will investigate the significance of chaos in neural information processing by analyzing the characteristics of artificial neural networks composed of neurons with chaotic dynamics. The nonlinear phenomena of deterministic chaos is now recognized as ubiquitous in fields such as feedback systems, optics, ecology and biological systems. This project will attempt to demonstrate the effects of chaotic fluctuations in applications of network and neurocomputing. For example, since chaotic neurons can produce macroscopic fluctuations spontaneously, they may provide a means of escaping from undesirable local minima in problems of optimiza- tion, learning and self organization. Dr. Aihara's background in mathematical modeling of chaotic neurons will complement Dr. Klerman's research experience in the area of circadian rhythms.

		15( 117 ). Six underrepresented undergraduates will be involved in field and laboratory research to determine the origin of three problematic glacial deposits in west-central Minnesota. This study will employ provenance analysis of soils and tills using; field pebble counts, sedimentary petrography, X-ray diffraction and magnetic susceptibility to determine source area. Provenance studies are readily accomplished at the undergraduate level yet remain the fundamental method of studying glacial deposits in Minnesota. U.M.M., an undergraduate institution, offers excellent facilities and close faculty contact. R.E.U. students will have the opportunity to develop collegial ties with other undergraduates doing geologic research and to serve as mentors, instructors and role models to underrepresented high school students participating in college level research. The research experience and the unique opportunity to interact with a scientific community where underrepresented individuals are i the majority will break down a number of traditional barriers and aid in the maturation of these students as scientists. The culmination to the program, the "Friends of UMM REU" conference, will provide students ;with the opportunity to present results and discuss ideas with experts in the field.

		16( 120 ). The University of New Hampshire will connect their campus network to the New England Academic and Research Network (NEARnet), a regional network which is part of the NSFNET. Direct connection to NEARnet will provide researchers with improved access to the Internet and other national networks such as CSNET/Bitnet and USENET. The proposed 56,000 bit per second, dedicated, communication link will improve reliability, speed, turn.around, and flexibility for data communication functions such as file transfer, remote login, and teleconferencing. NEARnet will provide for equipment, maintenance, and information services. The University of New Hampshire will be able to integrate supercomputing and collaborative research into graduate and udergraduate curricula. In addition to the main campus at Durham, Keene State College, Plymouth State College, and the State Department of Education will be offered connectivity through already existing local networks. This project thus provides sharing of resources among the state institutions, greatly facilitates research by students and faculty, and provides a valuable resource to supplement course work.

		17( 132 ). The research objective is to improve the fabrication of optical fibers (waveguides), by using aerosol doping. The proposed method involves the transport and evaporation of an aerosol of solution droplets in the MCVD (Modified Chemical Vapor Deposition) and OVD (Outside Vapor Deposition) techniques. The focus of this research is on the experimental fluid mechanics and heat transfer aspects. The novelty of the proposal consists in the way in which the mist is created by an ultrasonic nebulizer and transported to the deposition surface. This work will be done in collaboration with the modelling effort carried out at Northeastern University. The new techniques for the doping of non-volatile dopants into optical fibers have particular relevance to the fabrication of fiber laser amplifiers for telecommunications purposes. Two graduate students will be prepared in this area with a shortage of specialists.

		18( 143 ). This award supports cooperative research on theoretical nuclear physics to be carried out by Akif Balantekin, William Friedman and Kirk McVoy of the University of Wisconsin at Madison in collaboration with Brazilian physicists Maria Nemes at the University of Sao Paulo and Carlos Bertulani at the Federal University in Rio de Janeiro. They will study electromagnetic processes in heavy-ion nuclear reactions. The immediate goal of the research is to investigate whether bremsstrahlung radiation carries specific information about the nature of nuclear fragmentation in relativistic heavy-ion reactions. Also to be studied are the limitations of the widely used Williams-Weizacker virtual photon limit of the electromagnetic excitation process by comparing to a fully quantum mechanical treatment. The idea to use bremsstrahlung radiation is a new one so the investigation will prove to be timely and interesting. This work will bring together a team with unique experience on both sides. Besides the mutual benefit to the U.S. and Brazil, this research will be beneficial to the community of nuclear scientists.

		19( 154 ). This proposed work aims to measure the low temperature and high pressure properties of beta- and beta"-alumina, and beta"-alumina containing various divalent and trivalent ions. The high purity materials to be investigated will be prepared in-house. Information on the transport properties and internal structure and mechanisms of these materials are of great technological interest both as fast ion conductors and optical materials and laser hosts.

		20( 155 ). This award will provide supplemental support to enable Dr. Justin Schwartz of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology to conduct collaborative research for six months with Dr. Kiyoshi Inoue of the National Research Institute for Metals (NRIM) in Tsukuba, Japan. They will address some of the key development issues for superconducting magnets. Any practical application of high temperature ceramic supercon- ductors will require a tremendous research and development effort. Dr. Schwartz will participate in two on-going projects at NRIM, one involving design optimization of the coil for a high field pulsed magnet, and the second looking at long tape, Ag-sheathed, Bi-system high temperature superconductors. NRIM has been involved in the design and optimization of high field research magnets for many years and should thus provide an ideal setting for this young U.S. scientist to participate in pioneering research.

		21( 171 ). This dissertation is a study of Japanese youth culture. It focuses on the relationship of societal opportunities provided by education to commitment to academic performance in a sample of vocational and regular high school students from different socioeconomic backgrounds. Two methods of collecting data will be employed. Students and their mothers will be surveyed on their values, and a qualitative observation will focus on lifestyles of the two high school groups. This study will provide data that may be useful in encouraging academic performance among American high school students.

		22( 222 ). This award provides support to The University of Minnesota to continue the summer program of undergraduate research experiences in the behavioral sciences established in 1987. The ten-week program emphasizes student participation in the research activities of faculty affiliated with the Center of Liberal Arts. Eleven undergraduates will participate, two-thirds from private liberal arts colleges in the state of Minnesota and one-third from the University; they will be expected to have completed their junior year. Student's will: (1) assist with a faculty member's research including opportunities to work as a member of a research team, (2) complete a research project, the final product of which will be a written report and a presentation to peers and participating faculty, and (3) participate in a multidisciplinary seminar. Seminar activities include presentations by program faculty and faculty in related areas campus wide, laboratory tours, and lectures on research tools and design. The program will therefore include opportunities for the students to learn specific research methods, to apply these methods in the context of their own research, and to examine broad conceptual and methodological issues relating to psychology and the cognitive sciences. Participation in social/cultural events as well as common housing in a University dorm will help foster a strong community of students.

		23( 236 ). Professor Luther Erickson and other members of the Chemistry Department of Grinnell College are being supported to conduct a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site in Chemistry. For the period 1990-92, ten (10) undergraduate students will spend ten (10) weeks each summer actively engaged in a variety of research projects. Projects range from molecular orbital calculations on transition metal hydrides to investigation of the diffusion of analytes in solid polymers. Students will be expected to write a project proposal, carry out supervised experimental work, present a seminar on the proposal and a second seminar on the results, and write a detailed final report.

		24( 249 ). This award provides funds to the Department of Psychology at Trinity College to establish a Research Experiences for Undergraduate Site. The program will provide minority students with research opportunities in test construction and validation. The project contains two components: (1) a short course on psychological measurement that concentrates on personality test construction, and (2) student-initiated research on the same topic. In addition to learning the theory underlying the development and validation of personality tests, students will learn methods for gathering information to test hypotheses and will gain experience with scientific reasoning. Following the course, small groups of students will develop and conduct research projects designed to test the validity of an assessment instrument. Students will prepare written research reports and will present their results orally to project participants and other audiences. Successful projects will be presented at undergraduate and professional conferences. Students recruited for this program primarily will be African-American and Hispanic college students who formerly participated in a college preparation program entitled "Career Beginnings."

		25( 261 ). This proposal describes a possible method for transforming Drosophila embryos by injecting them with defined oligonucleotides. If the nucleotide sequences substitute for the normal gene, mutation will be produced. Putative mutations will be confirmed by breeding tests and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) diagnoses. This is a high risk effort with a large payoff if successful. If it works at a reasonable rate, the transformation of Drosophila will be greatly simplified if not become routine.

		26( 270 ). This award provides continued NSF support for the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) program in Evolutionary Biology at the American Museum of Natural Hi story. Drawing on the research and teaching expertise of the Museum's scientific staff, the program revolves around projects carefully designed to introduce undergraduate level students to the excitement and challenge of original research in Evolutionary Biology. Included in the program structure is a series of weekly meetings at which students will discuss their research, present informal progress reports, and take part in discussions and seminars on graduate and research career opportunities. A special lecture series, in which eminent evolutionary biologists will be invited to address the REU students has been planned to supplement their roundtable discussion series. At the end of the program, students will participate in a seminar where they will give a formal presentation of their work. Students will be encouraged to continue regular contact with their Project Supervisors and prepare their research results in the form of joint authored papers for submission to professional journals. The AMNH will institute a follow-up program for REU participants aimed at encouraging them in careers in science.

		27( 272 ). Continued funding for an ongoing undergraduate research program that for five years has been training electrical engineering and computer science students during the summers before their senior years is sought. Students will be recruited from a variety of other schools, including primarily undergraduate institutions. The research environment will be enriched by additional undergraduate students funded from other sources. Each participant will have regular meetings with an individual faculty mentor to plan work and review progress throughout the eleven week program. Project topics in electrophysics will include artificial plasmas, microwave propagation. microstrip antennas, frequency doubling in lasers, picosecond opto- electronics, and thin film devices. Information systems topics will include image communication, multi-variable feedback control, continuous phase modulation digital signalling, LAN simulation tools, and robotics. All will benefit from extensive interactions with participating faculty and graduate students. Participants will have informative tours of our research laboratories. There will be two or three seminar presentations to the group by leaders from industry, universities or government agencies. A tour will be arranged at a nearby industrial lab or national laboratory. The program will terminate with a two-day research review during which each student will make a presentation and answer abstract of his report. A prize will be awarded to the best project.

		28( 289 ). This project is to establish a U.S. national panel on structural control research for seismic and wind resistant design. The objective is to establish a sound knowledge basis for research, to develop a national R&D program for the active control of structures, and to conduct a collaborative planning study project with a counterpart panel in Japan established by the Japan Science Agency. A plan of action will be developed which consists of possible multi-national efforts involving collaborative projects, exchange of personnel, jointly organized experiments, and exchange of data and technical information, etc. The activities will involve researchers from academic field, industry, and government laboratories. The programs will be carried out under the general auspices of the International Decade for Natural Disaster Reduction (IDNDR). The effort will bring about accelerated implementation of an emerging technology in active structural control which holds great promise for reducing structural damages for seismic and wind loadings.

		29( 291 ). The research objective is to improve the fabrication of optical fibers (waveguides), by using aerosol doping. The proposed method involves the transport and evaporation of an aerosol of solution droplets in the MCVD (Modified Chemical Vapor Deposition) and OVD (Outside Vapor Deposition) techniques. The focus of this research is on the modelling fluid mechanics and heat transfer aspects. The results will be included in previously developed computer codes for the MCVD process. This work will be done in collaboration with the experimental effort carried out at Brown University. The novelty of the proposal consists in the way in which the mist is created by an ultrasonic nebulizer and transported to the deposition surface. The new techniques for the doping of non- volatile dopants into optical fibers have particular relevance to the fabrication of fiber laser amplifiers for telecommunications purposes.

		30( 292 ). A new Materials Research Group will investigate microstructure in polycrystalline materials. The objective is to study, in real time, the evolution of thermo-mechanical processing events, and their impact on the mechanical, electrical, and elastic properties of engineering materials. The work will exploit recent advances in electron diffraction techniques (backscatter Kikuchi diffraction) which will enable automated measurements of a new class of microstructural measures of texture in polycrystalline materials. These microtextures are believed to affect a wide range of material properties and performance. The scope of activity will involve an inter-disciplinary, multi- collaborator group, centered at Yale University, with additional group members at Drexel University, The University of Bristol (England), and NIST (Boulder). The research involves both theoretical and experimental aspects of texture analysis. The project should result in development of a timely and necessary new generation of tools required to address fundamental topics which have great potential for application in materials processing occurring in both the primary and advanced metals industries.

		31( 299 ). This award will provide support to a group from Johns Hopkins University for a research program on the physics of elementary particles. The research will be conducted at the Tevatron proton antiproton collider at Fermilab, CDF. The primary responsibility of the group will be to work on the upgrade of the vertex detector at CDF using silicon strips for high precision tracking of the particles. The aim is to be able to tag B mesons and study their properties and to pursue the search for the existence of the top quark. The use of silicon strip detectors will also serve as test for their future use at very high energy and high luminosity colliders like the SSC.

		32( 302 ). Acquiring a transmission electron microscope would greatly strengthen research opportunities in cell, molecular, and developmental biology at Wright State University. Students taking our research-oriented course in electron microscopy or doing a research project using electron microscopy will have the opportunity to use modern equipment that is flexible, reliable, and comparable to facilities available in commercial laboratories or major research institutions nationwide. Specific research opportunities for undergraduates include the projects outlined in this proposal: (1) the influence of gravity on plant growth and development, (2) cuticular and gut ultrastructure of Sarcoptes scabiei from susceptible and resistant hosts, (3) growth and differentiation of epidermal keratinocytes, (4) morphological adaptation of avian osmoregulatory organs to changing physiological demands, and (5) secretion of gonadotropin releasing hormone in the central nervous system.

		33( 311 ). This research consists of an experimental and theoretical investigation of grain growth in polycrystalline films on single crystal substrates. Reflected high energy and transmission electron diffraction, transmission electron microscopy, and thin film X-ray texture analysis are employed to characterize the film grain size and orientation. Metal-on-metal, metal-on-mica, and metal-on-alkali halide model systems are the principal materials under study. Experimental results on grain growth are compared to predictions from computer simulations and analytical theories. A primary goal is to determine the film/substrate interface energy as a function of relative film/substrate orientation by experimental methods and compare these results with atomistic computer simulations.

		34( 314 ). This is a continuation of a successful program that involves undergraduate students in meaningful and timely research. It will continue to be an important part of the education process in physics in the region.

		35( 325 ). This award is a planning grant under the NSF Program "Research Opportunities for Women." This type of grant aids women to develop their own competitive research programs. This activity comprises preparation of a detailed and competitive research plan in scientific visualization. Visits to universities, research centers, and producers of visualization software, as well as literature search, are involved.

		36( 358 ). The National Supercomputer Facility at Cornell University will select 20 undergraduate students from around the country to learn about supercomputers and to learn how they can be used to solve important scientific problems. These students and their institutional advisers will be brought to Cornell during the summer of 1990 to learn about supercomputer technologies and to define a problem requiring computationally intense solutions. The students will complete their projects for academic credit after returning to their home institutions. This program provides a unique learning opportunity for students from small colleges as well as for women and minority students who will be especially recruited.

		37( 359 ). This award will provide supplementary support to enable Dr. Paul Fons of the University of Illinois to conduct collaborative research for 12 months with Dr. Teruaki Motooka of the University of Tsukuba, Japan. They will investigate the basic mechanisms of solid-phase epitaxy of amorphous silicon on crystalline silicon and the physics of silica/silicon interfaces. Semiconductor processing technologies are becoming increasing dependent on a detailed understanding of non-equilibrium solid- phase interfaces and growth mechanisms. This study will attempt to characterize interfacial properties using Raman spectroscopy, time-resolved ellipsometry, and electrical measurements. Interfacial structure will be modeled using both Molecular-Orbital and Molecular Dynamics calculations. Dr. Motooka's extensive experience with the theoretical analysis of interface structure and proficiency in the interpretation of related experimental data should complement and focus Dr. Fon's broad background in metallurgy, solid-state physics, solid-state devices, and computer simulations.

		38( 363 ). Experimental investigations of the properties of amorphous semiconductors, especially metal-chalcogenide glasses, with the intention of understanding the defects which occur in these materials. Also to be addressed are questions regarding the microscopic origins of optically-induced paramagnetism and photodarkening in semiconducting chalcogenide glasses. A broadly-based experimental program will be applied, including methods such as magnetic resonance spectroscopy, optical spectroscopies, combinations of optical and magnetic resonance techniques, and electrical measurements.


	Top Words:
		1. STUDENTS
		2. PROGRAM
		3. UNDERGRADUATE
		4. FACULTY
		5. RESEARCH


Cluster 7

	Documents:
		1( 17 ). (1) The trace formula of J. Arthur and A. Selberg (for the trace of the action of a Hecke correspondence on the L2 cohomology of a Hermitian locally symmetric space) will be reproved and interpreted in terms of the Lefschetz fixed point theorem. This will involve a new evaluation of the local contribution to the Lefschetz number at a fixed point and the construction of a new cohomology theory ("weighted cohomology") on the reductive Borel-Serre compactification of X. Applications will be made to the computation of characters of discrete series representations, the cohomology of discrete groups, and the Hodge (p,q) decomposition of the L2 cohomology. (2) Chern numbers of singular complex algebraic varieties will be defined by lifting Chern classes to intersection cohomology. The invariance properties of these new Chern numbers will be investigated.

		2( 56 ). This award supports the research in arithmetic algebraic geometry of Professor Alice Silverberg of The Ohio State University. Dr. Silverberg's project is to study arithmetic quotients of bounded symmetric domains and their points, and especially certain special group representations associated to such points. This is research in the field of arithmetic algebraic geometry, a subject that combines the techniques of algebraic geometry and number theory. In its original formulation, algebraic geometry treated figures that could be defined in the plane by the simplest equations, namely polynomials. Number theory started with the whole numbers and such questions as divisibility of one whole number by another. These two subjects, seemingly so far apart, have in fact influenced each other from the earliest times, but in the past quarter century the mutual influence has increased greatly. The field of arithmetic algebraic geometry now uses techniques from all of modern mathematics, and is having corresponding influence beyond its own borders.

		3( 66 ). This award supports the research in combinatorics of Professors Dennis Stanton, Paul Edelman, and Dennis White of the University of Minnesota. Their project is to study partition statistics and orthogonal polynomials, the weak order of the symmetric group, and partition congruences. This research falls in the broad category of combinatorics, which is one of the most active fields in today's mathematics. Fundamentally, combinatorics represents a systematization of the very first of all mathematical activities, counting. In its modern development, however, combinatorics has gone beyond just counting to make use of a wide variety of advanced mathematical techniques, and although its roots go back several centuries, the field has had an explosive development in the past few decades because of its importance in communications and information technology.

		4( 72 ). Bonahon will study limit sets of Kleinian groups and of hyperbolic groups. A Kleinian group is a discrete group of isometries of hyperbolic 3-space. Bonahon intends to study the topological type of the limit set of a Kleinian group and show that it is determined by the algebraic structure of the group together with certain geometric invariants of the associated quotient space. He also wants to study the asymptotic behavior of the leaves of foliations of hyperbolic 3-space which are invariant under a Kleinian group (namely lifts of foliations of hyperbolic 3-manifolds) and to analyze how fast these leaves approach the limit set of the group. Following Gromov's terminology, a hyperbolic group is a finitely generated group which has certain growth properties similar to those of a cocompact Kleinian group. Such a hyperbolic group has a well defined limit set, also called its boundary. Bonahon wants to analyze how certain topological properties of the limit set of a hyperbolic group are related to algebraic properties of the group, involving in particular its outer automorphism group and decompositions into amalgamated products. Advances in the study of 3-dimensional manifolds in recent years, following work of Thurston, has rather surprisingly shown the extreme relevance of hyperbolic geometry to the understanding of the structure of 3-manifolds.

		5( 85 ). Professor Bendersky intends to use the machinery of elliptic genera to study geometric problems. He plans to study the problem of vector fields on Spin manifolds from the point of view of elliptic genera. He also plans to continue his investigation of the implications of the rigidity of elliptic genera on the Brown-Kervaire and Atiyah invariants of Spin manifolds with circle actions. This project will also study the interaction of the unstable Novikov spectral sequence and the unstable Adams spectral sequence. Using recent work of Davis and Mahowald, he plans to compute many of the James numbers. Both parts of this project involve highly intricate algebraic constructions which lend themselves, surprisingly, to understanding the geometry of some very natural geometric objects, namely the Spin manifolds.//

		6( 88 ). This project is an investigation into the representation theory and cohomology of finite groups over fields of prime characteristic. Of particular interest is the structure of modules and the homological properties of modules. The p+incipal investigator will work on the complexes associated to polynomial subrings of the cohomology ring of a group. He will also study topological applications of the theory of varieties and cohomology rings. The research supported concerns the representation of finite groups over fields. The structure of the groups is realized through the action of the groups as transformations on spaces. This is currently one of the most active areas of pure algebra.

		7( 109 ). This research is concerned with the structure of modules, with emphasis on their direct-sum relations and local-global relations. The class of rings involved is that of module-finite algebras over a commutative noetherian ring of Krull dimension 1. The object is to remove the traditional restrictions on the algebra and obtain new results in integral representation theory. A ring is an algebraic object having an addition and multiplication defined on it. The most familiar example is the ring of integers. These objects occur in many different settings in mathematics and theoretical physics.

		8( 118 ). This award supports the research in Diophantine approximations of Professor Paul Vojta of the University of California at Berkeley. Dr. Vojta's project is to extend his already-productive analogy between Nevanlinna Theory and Diophantine approximation theory, so as to get information on algebraic points of bounded degree on varieties. In addition, he hopes to generalize to varieties of higher dimension his independent proof of the Mordell-Faltings Theorem that arose from applying his viewpoint to Dyson's sharpening of the Thue-Siegel Theorem. This is research in the field of arithmetic algebraic geometry, a subject that combines the techniques of algebraic geometry and number theory. In its original formulation, algebraic geometry treated figures that could be defined in the plane by the simplest equations, namely polynomials. Number theory started with the whole numbers and such questions as divisibility of one whole number by another. These two subjects, seemingly so far apart, have in fact influenced each other from the earliest times, but in the past quarter century the mutual influence has increased greatly. The field of arithmetic algebraic geometry now uses techniques from all of modern mathematics, and is having corresponding influence beyond its own borders.

		9( 158 ). This research is concerned with characterizing geometries related to the Lie incidence geometries and other geometries related to simple groups. One part concerns geometries whose basic planar unit is an affine plane. A critical side issue of that study has been the determination of the geometric hyperplanes of the Lie incidence geometries. In this connection a geometric characterization of alternating k-linear forms seems imminent. This would show that all hyperplanes of Grassman spaces arise from such forms. A second part concerns a more long-range effort to generalize the characterizations of Lie incidence systems into a systematic whole. The third concerns some new directions into "non-parabolic" geometries related to simple groups. The fourth concerns substructures of polar spaces. The research in this project involves the interplay between finite dimensional geometry and the actions of groups of transformations on these geometries. This work has implications for the structure of finite groups, for algebraic coding theory, and for finite geometry.

		10( 159 ). This project is concerned with work in algebra, particularly in descent theory and its applications. This will include work on the structure and cohomology of affine algebraic group schemes, with emphasis on those arising as automorphisms of other structures. One area of application will be the structure of nonclassical simple Lie algebras in positive characteristics. A second application will be to Galois extensions of commutative rings. A third will be to the twisted forms of determinants. This research covers a wide range of topics in algebra. In particular, areas related to affine group schemes and descent theory will be considered. The results will provide insight into many areas of algebra.

		11( 165 ). This project is concerned with the representation theory of finite groups. The principal investigator will examine the endomorphism rings of permutation modules in characteristic p, Alperin's conjecture and related questions, and central units of finite order in blocks of RG. The postdoctoral associate will study modular Hecke algebras and quadratic G-modules in characteristic two. This research is in the general area of the representation theory of finite groups. One of the main applications of group theory to other mathematical and scientific fields is in representation theory.

		12( 193 ). The project of F. Connolly covers a variety of topics related to topological rigidity properties of crystallographic, arithmetic, and negatively curved groups. His investigations also include related questions about Nil-K-theory of such groups as well as the study of groups which act freely and cocompactly on the product of real n-space and an m-sphere. This work is related to a number of famous open problems, e.g., the Borel conjecture, the Novikov conjecture, and it draws upon a broad range of techniques.

		13( 238 ). This award supports the research in algebraic geometry and number theory of Professor David Harbater of the University of Pennsylvania. Dr. Harbater has proposed to continue his study of Galois covers of arithmetic varieties and of arithmetic intersection theory. He will work to construct Galois covers over the rational line having special type of Galois group and ramification, and in his intersection-theoretic work, he plans to use a horizontal pairing that he has recently defined in order to study arithmetic surfaces and to enlarge the Arakelov divisor group and study the fine structure at infinity. This is research in the field of arithmetic algebraic geometry, a subject that combines the techniques of algebraic geometry and number theory. In its original formulation, algebraic geometry treated figures that could be defined in the plane by the simplest equations, namely polynomials. Number theory started with the whole numbers and such questions as divisibility of one whole number by another. These two subjects, seemingly so far apart, have in fact influenced each other from the earliest times, but in the past quarter century the mutual influence has increased greatly. The field of arithmetic algebraic geometry now uses techniques from all of modern mathematics, and is having corresponding influence beyond its own borders.

		14( 245 ). This project is concerned with problems in noncommutative ring theory, category theory and other areas of algebra. The principal investigator will work on representable functors from varieties of associative rings to varieties of other algebraic objects. In addition, he will study the Gel'fand-Kirillov dimension of factor rings and lattices realizable as lattices of all two-sided ideals of von Neumann regular rings. The research supported concerns a wide spectum of problems in ring theory. It has the potential of impacting many areas of mathematics including ring theory, algebraic number theory, finite group theory and universal algebra, as well as, computer science.

		15( 271 ). This project is concerned with the algebraic theory of quadratic forms over fields of characteristic different from two. The principal investigator will investigate torsion-free properties in the Witt ring using Galois cohomology with coefficients in various Galois modules. He will also study quadratic forms over elliptic curves defined over an arbitrary field. In particular, he will use etale cohomology to investigate the Witt ring of such forms, especially when defined over a local field. This project is concerned with the theory of quadratic forms. A quadratic form is a polynomial function of several variables which is homogeneous of degree two. Quadratic forms over fields of characteristic other than two arise naturally from the symmetric inner products on vector spaces over these fields. Thus the forms are intimately connected to the geometry of the space.

		16( 298 ). This award supports the research in combinatorics and number theory of Professor Wen-Ching Li of The Pennsylvania State University. Dr. Li's project is centered on questions relating modular forms to graph theory. Among the questions she will investigate are: to realize certain Ramanujan graphs as quotients of trees associated to projective linear groups over p-adic fields; to continue her collaboration with Dr. F.K. Hwang of Bell Laboratories on generalized double loop networks; and to study the Galois structure of p-Sylow subgroups of ideal class groups. Non-Euclidean plane geometry began in the early nineteenth century as a mathematical curiosity, but by the end of that century, mathematicians had realized that many objects of fundamental importance are non-Euclidean in their basic nature. The detailed study of non-Euclidean plane geometries has given rise to several branches of modern mathematics, of which the study of modular and automorphic forms is one of the most active. This field is principally concerned with questions about the whole numbers, but in its use of geometry and analysis, it retains connection to its historical roots. The work of Professor Li is in this tradition, but extends beyond the traditional boundaries of the theory of modular forms in a particularly interdisciplinary thrust.

		17( 305 ). This award supports the research on the geometry and analysis of locally symmetric spaces and manifolds of negative curvature of Professor Svetlana Katok of the University of California at Santa Cruz. Dr. Katok's project consists of two main parts: first, she intends to study the cohomological equations associated with geodesic flows on compact negatively curved surfaces; and second, she will generalize spanning theorems that she has already proved for automorphic forms on Fuchsian groups to locally symmetric spaces of dimension greater than two. Non-Euclidean plane geometry began in the early nineteenth century as a mathematical curiosity, but by the end of that century, mathematicians had realized that many objects of fundamental importance are non-Euclidean in their basic nature. The detailed study of non-Euclidean plane geometries has given rise to several branches of modern mathematics, of which the study of modular and automorphic forms is one of the most active. This field is principally concerned with questions about the whole numbers, but in its use of geometry and analysis, as exemplified by the work of Professor Katok, it retains connection to its historical roots.

		18( 313 ). This award supports the research in automorphic forms of Professor Don Blasius of the University of California at Los Angeles. Dr. Blasius's project is to complete the construction of Galois representations for Maass forms of Galois type by extending to coherent cohomology certain methods of interpre- tation that have been established for holomorphic forms; to stabilize the Trace Formula for GSp(4), beginning with the Fundamental Lemma; and to study certain lifting problems involving Abelian varieties, in the setting of Shimura varieties, applying his work on p-adic properties of Hodge classes. Non-Euclidean plane geometry began in the early nineteenth century as a mathematical curiosity, but by the end of that century, mathematicians had realized that many objects of fundamental importance are non-Euclidean in their basic nature. The detailed study of non-Euclidean plane geometries has given rise to several branches of modern mathematics, of which the study of modular and automorphic forms is one of the most active. This field is principally concerned with questions about the whole numbers, but in its use of geometry and analysis, it retains connection to its historical roots.

		19( 326 ). The principal investigator will attempt to broaden the scope of certain algebraic techniques of proven geometric utility. In the 1960's Daniel Quillen showed how to define homology and cohomology in many categories. These included simplicial sets, where he obtained the ordinary cohomology of topological spaces, but the categories of simplicial algebras over a field and simplicial unstable algebras over the mod-p Steenrod algebra both support an idea of cohomology that is relevant in homotopy theory. Cohomology of simplicial unstable algebras, for example, is the correct context for studying the E2 term of the Bousfield- Kan spectral sequence, an unstable Adams-type spectral sequence which has gained prominence due to the work of Haynes Miller, Jean Lannes and others. Under prior NSF grants, the principal investigator has made a successful study of the Quillen-type cohomology in various categories of algebras. The purpose of this project is to take these results and to extend and apply them. In particular, he should now be able to make an in-depth study of Barratt's desuspension spectral sequence and his "Lie ring analyzer" - both a source of conjecture and speculation for 30 years. Other projects include combining the Quillen-type cohomology techniques with the methods of Chris Stover to approach the homotopy groups of a wedge of two spaces, the study of a spectral sequence for computing the homotopy groups of a space of sections, and an exploration of the homology of function complexes using tools of Jean Lannes and A.K. Bousfield.

		20( 335 ). Let L be a local or global number field which is a finite extension of the field K. When L/K is Galois, classical Galois module theory seeks to understand the ring of integers in a number field as a module over its Galois group ring. This research will examine several questions in this vein. The principal investigator will determine suitable criteria for the ring of integers in a number field to be locally free over its Galois group ring. He will also work on the classification of commutative, cocommutative prime-power rank Hopf algebras. Number theory, which is the study of the properties of the whole numbers, is one of the oldest branches of mathematics. In modern days, problems in number theory have furnished the driving force for the creation of new mathematics in the fields of pure algebra, analysis, and geometry. Some of the most recent applications of number theory have appeared in theoretical computer science and coding theory.

		21( 336 ). This project is concerned with research on the valuation theory of division algebras finite-dimensional over their centers. A particular focus is the further study of Dubrovin valuation rings. A ring is an algebraic object having an addition and a multiplication defined on it. Rings occur naturally in many different settings in mathematics. This project is concerned with an important class of rings called division algebras.

		22( 343 ). This research is concerned with probabilistic and generational properties of finite groups. In particular the structure of a random permutation group will be investigated. These results will be applied to algorithmic questions concerning permutation groups. The principal investigator will also consider properties of finite quotients of affine buildings associated with p-adic simple groups. In addition, the relationships among certain generalized quadrangles and certain translation planes will be considered. A group is an algebraic object having a single operation. This work is concerned with determining the generators of a finite group from a probabilistic standpoint. These questions arise directly from desired applications in contemporary computer science.

		23( 356 ). Long plans to examine several interrelated questions in the theory of low dimensional manifolds, braid groups and representation varieties. The specific aims concern surgeries on knot manifolds and residual properties of their fundamental groups. This has interactions with mapping class and braid groups, where the techniques to be used include the Thurston theory of mapping class groups. Low dimensional geometric objects (manifolds) are a natural subject for investigation by inhabitants of a 3-dimensional space.

		24( 370 ). Professors Culler and Shalen will continue their program for estimating Margulis constants, injectivity radii, and volumes of hyperbolic manifolds by using Sullivan-Patterson measures associated to 2-generator Kleinian groups. They will investigate group actions on generalized trees, extending research of Culler- Vogtmann and Gillet-Shalen. They will also apply the theory of character varieties to the study of Heegaard splittings of non- Haken 3-manifolds. Culler will continue his work on cohomological properties of the outer automorphism group of the free group. Shalen will study questions about amalgamated free product decompositions and deficiencies of subgroups, both in 3-manifold groups and in more general finitely presented groups. He will also investigate possible generalizations of Casson's invariant and connections with SL(2,C) representations of 3-manifold groups. These are all very active topics in the topology of 3- dimensional manifolds, i.e. very natural geometric objects of the same dimension as the space in which we live.


	Top Words:
		1. GROUPS
		2. ALGEBRAIC
		3. THEORY
		4. COHOMOLOGY
		5. GEOMETRY


Cluster 8

	Documents:
		1( 19 ). Extensive evidence suggests that resource quantity and quality can have an important influence on zooplankton community structure. Hypotheses developed in this research describe how the resource base of the zooplankton is expected to vary seasonally among systems with differing trophy and differing nitrogen and phosphorus supply ratios. Predictions are made regarding the response of the zooplankton community to these variations in resource base. The preliminary results of experiments conducted this past summer are discussed as they pertain to the proposed hypotheses. Further research is proposed that will allow evaluation virtually all of the components of the resource base and of the zooplankton community to enrichment at high and low TN:TP ratios.

		2( 30 ). Interstellar Scattering Disks. Dr. Gwinn will carry out a radio wavelength observational study of the shapes of scattering disks in the interstellar medium and of their temporal variations. The observations include Very Long Baseline Interferometry (VLBI) measurements of the sizes of the scattering disks of pulsars over periods of years; sensitive VLBI observations of the scattering disks of hydroxyl masers; and a search for speckles in the scattering disk of the Vela pulsar. Radio wavelength scattering in the interstellar plasma limits the resolution and positional accuracy of observations of many radio sources and will become more important as a limit as VLBI baselines are extended into space and the accuracy of astrometric VLBI approaches the microarcsecond level. Large scale plasma fluctuations, acting as lenses, can focus and defocus radiation from pulsars and quasars, producing the observed low frequency variability of these sources. Dr. Gwinn's research is directed toward improving our understanding of the properties of the scattering plasma.

		3( 44 ). A major goal of the CEDAR (Coupling, Energetics and Dynamics of Atmospheric Regions) programs is an understanding of global ionospheric-thermospheric coupling. The equatorial region is of major interest in the overall understanding of the global picture. This project proposes to carry out extensive coordinated observations centered around the ALTAIR, an incoherent scatter radar located in the Kwajalein Atoll, Marshall island. The experiments would include an HF/UHF frequency- agile radar on Kosrae, East Coroline Island and an optical facility (Fabry-Perot interferometer and all-sky low light level image) on Wake Island. The science studies will center around observations of electron drift in the equatorial electrojet, and the vertical F-layer motion. Much of the first year observational data base will be acquired during an extensive NASA rocket campaign scheduled for the summer of 1990.//

		4( 64 ). The research supported under this grant is the continuation of a very successful joint project of C. B. Foltz, C. Impey, and F. Chaffee of the University of Arizona, and R. Weymann and S. Morris of the Carnegie Institution of Washington. These investigators, widely considered to be world leaders in their field, will complete an optical survey of over 1000 bright quasars using broadly based and quantifiable selection criteria. This new observational material will be used to make a number of studies not previously possible. Among these will be a probe of a very large supercluster of absorbers lying in front of several quasars, studies of the relationship between radio and optical power in quasars, and investigations of possible links between nonthermal optical properties of quasars and their VLBI radio emission.

		5( 124 ). Utah State University will conduct CEDAR research at the Hardware Ranch Observatory (HRO), mid-latitude facility for the study of the upper atmosphere. HRO consists of two sites -- Hardware Ranch and Bear Lake -- that are located in the Wasatch Mountain Range 25 and 38 miles, respectively from the university. Both sites are well situated for optical and radio observations and are very accessible to researchers and students.***//

		6( 131 ). The quality of forecasts made with numerical prediction models degrades during the numerical integration due to systematic errors, that is, errors that are related to the model's formulation. Preliminary studies done with the Community Climate Model (CCM) of the National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) indicate that horizontal resolution may be a critical factor in the evolution and structure of planetary scale waves which are simulated by the CCM. The goal of this research project is to determine the role of model resolution in systematic error. It will be accomplished through simulations of five winter periods and several forecast experiments. The results will have important implications for improving both extended range weather forecasts (up to 30 days) and climate models. This project represents a collaboration between Dr. T.-C. Chen, the principal investigator, and Dr. Joseph Tribbia, an NCAR scientist.

		7( 139 ). The CEDAR ( Coupling, Energetics and Dynamics of Atmospheric Regions ) program has as part of its major goals the understanding of the mesosphere/lower thermosphere region of the atmosphere. One of the most powerful techniques used to study this region is optical lidar and the CEDAR program has led in the development of sensitive state of the art rayleigh and resonance lidar systems. This project is another step forward in this area with the installation of a temperature measurement lidar system for that region of the atmosphere. This will be only the second such system capable of routine temperature measurements in the world and will be the most advanced system. This coupled with the simultaneous measurements with other lidar systems and radar systems at the Urbana,Illinois field station will provide significant new incite into the dynamics of the mesosphere and lower thermosphere.

		8( 162 ). This proposal provides funds for a three year program leading to the implementation of an enhanced incoherent scatter data acquisition system at the Millstone Hill I.S. Radar Facility. Some funding has been previously provided by the NSF for the construction of a state-of-the-art data acquisition system known as MIDAS (Millstone Ionospheric Data Acquisition System). Hardware for a second such system has been provided by the Office of Naval Research (ONR). This proposal calls for constructing a second MIDAS systems.***//

		9( 176 ). With this proposal Dr. Foster of MIT/Haystack Observatory seeks funds for a modest permanent CEDAR optical observatory on MIT property near the Millstone Hill radar facility. At present, CEDAR optical instruments and visitors are housed at several separate locations on space available basis. The new site would provide a better optical horizon than any of the existing locations and consolidate instrumentation and facilitate access to CEDAR investigators.*** //

		10( 195 ). This award will allow the Principal Investigator to upgrade the positioning and guidance system of the Southwest Missouri State University (SMSU) Baker Observatory 0.4-m Cassegrain reflecting telescope. This telescope was one of the first instruments used at Kitt Peak National Observatory (KPNO) and Cerro Tololo Interamerican Observatory (CTIO). It was obtained from CTIO by SMSU in 1983 on a long-term, renewable loan basis. The telescope was installed at Baker Observatory in 1984, and although the optical system is still quite satisfactory, the positioning and guidance system is in need of modernization. This award provides funds to purchase a computer-controlled closed-loop stepping motor positioning system and a remote guiding system. These will allow rapid and accurate positioning and precise guiding of the telescope. This will permit efficient use with existing instrumentation, which consists of an automated-filter photometer and a CCD imaging system. The scientific programs to be carried out with these instruments include high precision photoelectric and CCD camera photometry of variable stars, standard stars, and bright galaxies.

		11( 234 ). This is a proposal to carry out a planning workshop for a new upper atmospheric observatory. The centerpiece of this observatory is to be an incoherent scatter radar. The location of the observatory is to be near the magnetic north pole, probably near Resolute Bay on the island of Cornwallis in the Northwest Territories of Canada.***//

		12( 287 ). During the past few decades observed increases in atmospheric concentrations of certain trace species (eg. CO2, O3, CH4, etc.) have resulted in a growing awareness of man's potential to perturb his environment on a global scale. Consequently, this decade has seen increased efforts to identify and understand the properties of the remote atmosphere and the processes relating the sources, transformations and removal of the constituents that are present. This kind of investigation involves measurement of the particle and gas phase species of interest in conjunction with the environmental and meteorological parameters known to influence their behavior. Understanding these processes is essential to assessing the importance of various issues of current environmental concern. These include 1) the role of clouds on climate, 2) the role of aerosol and gases in atmospheric radiative transfer and 3) the geochemical cycling of atmospheric constituents. Any investigation of these issues requires a knowledge of the relative influence of anthropogenic, "natural" continental and marine contributions. This research project will support the analysis of data collected from: 1) the recent Central Pacific Atmospheric Comparison Experiment (CPACE) aboard the NCAR-Electra aircraft was intended to intercompare and evaluate recently developed techniques for measuring gas and aerosol species at low concentrations. Size-resolved aerosol information will be combined with the measurements of other CPACE investigators for the characterization of our atmospheric observations and to complete the proposed evaluation of aerosol inlet losses; and 2) measurements of aerosol physicochemistry and optical properties during five equatorial transects currently obtained as part of the Soviet-American Gas and Aerosol Experiment Three (SAGA III) the equatorial Pacific between Hawaii and Samoa in spring of 1990.

		13( 364 ). This proposal provides funds to equip the Sondrestrom incoherent scatter radar so that it can routinely detect echoes from the "electron component" of the backscatter spectrum known as "plasma line". SRI proposes to investigate high-latitude plasma line signatures to design and add appropriate hardware and software, and to achieve a routinely operating plasma line capability for the scientific community.***//


	Top Words:
		1. OBSERVATORY
		2. CEDAR
		3. RADAR
		4. OPTICAL
		5. ATMOSPHERIC


Cluster 9

	Documents:
		1( 78 ). This award extends for one year the American Statistical Association project entitled "On- Site Research Program to Improve the Quality of Labor Statistics". The plan for subsequent years is to effect a merger with similar on- site research programs conducted at the Bureau of Census and the National Center for Education Statistics. The program, which was initiated at the Bureau of Labor Statistics in 1987, brings senior research fellows and associates to the Bureau for periods of up to one year. Its broadbased goal is to help bridge the gap between academic scholars and governmental scientists by exposing the fellows and associates to the methodological problems and policy issues likely to be encountered only in a large scale Federal statistical agency and by exposing government social scientists to new theoretical developments which might have application to their work. Residence at the Bureau allows fellows and associates to carry out research that would be difficult if not impossible to do without the ready access to the data resources of the Bureau of Labor Statistics which the program provides.

		2( 283 ). The Gordon Research Conferences are held every summer to discuss the recent findings and current thinking in various areas of science. Although participation is limited, the attendees usually consist of established scientists, young investigators who are making important contributions in these areas and postdoctoral fellows. They are held in small, isolated New England towns away from other distractions and conducive to the exchange of ideas. These conferences have a recognized value for presenting the latest advances in research and also indicating the future trends which are likely to be most productive.


	Top Words:
		1. BUREAU
		2. FELLOWS
		3. CONFERENCES
		4. ASSOCIATES
		5. LABOR


Cluster 10

	Documents:
		1( 10 ). This project is an integrated study of forest dynamics and ethnobotany in Peruvian Amazonia, which will provide essential data for the sustained use of these highly varied forests. The investigation centers on mortality, ingrowth, and growth rates for trees and lianas >10cm d.b.h. in eight fully identified one- hectare plots established in 1983. Preliminary data indicate major between-site variation in mortality rates; these will be examined for the dependence of forest dynamics and diversity on each other and on soil and climatic variables. For thirteen one- hectare plots, the researchers will take local informants to each identified tree and liana to quantify their knowledge of plant use, and to compare such knowledge between informants. Data on plant use and population dynamics will be used to discover if the common useful species in each plot are regenerating. For selected palm species, the project will compare the effectiveness of canopy diameter, tree height, and d.b.h. as predictors of one year's fruit yield. The research will contribute directly ecological theory of forest dynamics and conservation.

		2( 46 ). Tiger swallowtails use a number of plant species that vary in their chemical composition. These host species differ in their attractiveness to egg-laying females and their suitability for caterpillar growth. In addition, genetically different individuals show dissimilar responses on identical host plants. Potentially, the differential ability of swallowtails to recognize or grow on different plant species serves to maintain much of the genetic variation observed in natural swallowtail populations. Although selection tends to eliminate certain genotypes on certain hosts, it tends to increase their frequency on other hosts. The proposed research is designed to assess the genetic basis for the physiological and behavioral patterns of host plant usage by the tiger swallowtail. The investigators hypothesize that this subspecies is comprised of a complex of differentially adapted genotypes and populations. Experiments will compare the responses of three geographic populations and families within populations on three different host plants. Complementary analyses will determine the genetic substructure of these populations. Information obtained from these laboratory and field studies will elucidate the role of host diversity in maintaining genetic variability among and within populations of a single species. Such knowledge will help in understanding how insects adapt to their food sources and will prove useful in developing pest management programs for commercially important crop species.

		3( 71 ). Although insect herbivores are a diverse group and attack plants in a variety of ways, few studies have compared the impacts of different types of insect feeding on a host species. This research will examine how an insect's feeding style affects its impact by comparing three insects that feed on goldenrod (Solidago altissima): a leaf chewing beetle (Trirhabda sp.), a phloem feeding aphid (Uroleucon caligatum), and a xylem tapping spittlebug (Philaenus spumarius). Plants will be grown in pots and insects will be placed on them at densities that span the range of actual insect densities observed in our long-term censuses of goldenrod insects. Impacts on both reproductive and vegetative growth will be investigated. Effects on fitness will be evaluated by measuring fecundity, mean seed weights, rhizome weights, and nitrogen content of seeds and rhizomes. Plant allocation to buds, leaves, stems, and roots will be determined, as will leaf area and leaf nitrogen levels. A second objective is to see how herbivore impacts vary with the nutrient status of the host plant. Plants will be grown at two levels of soil fertility to see how impacts on plant fitness are effected. It is not currently possible to predict which types of insect feeding will be most damaging to plants, and this study will help to fill that gap.

		4( 105 ). Two broad aims of this research are to determine (1) the pathways followed by sugars manufactured in the photosynthesizing cells (mesophyll cells) of the leaf to the food-conducting cells (sieve-tube members) of the leaf veins, and (2) the sites at which the sugars are actively secreted, or loaded, and unloaded in mature (source) and immature (sink) leaves, respectively. Detailed structural studies, with light and electron microscopes, are complemented by experimental studies, including localization of 14C-labeled sugars within the leaf by microautoradiography; plasmolysis studies designed to determine the solute (primarily sugar) concentrations of the various cell types; and the use of fluorescent dyes to determine whether substances move from cell to cell via cytoplasmic connection in their walls (symplastic movement), via the cell wall continuum (apoplastic movement), or a combination of the two. The results of these studies will be of long-term practical importance in relation to crop productivity and will be of great value to investigators interested in relations of viruses, insects, mycoplasmas, and other parasites, and in the movement of insecticides and growth regulating substances in cultivated plants. Barley, maize, and soybean, species to be studied, are economically important plants.

		5( 160 ). The mimosa group of tropical legumes are woody plants that range in stature from small prickly shrubs of Mexican and Argentine deserts or Caribbean coral reef-shores to gigantic emergent forest trees of Brazilian Amazonia. They enter all woodland shrub communities of the Neotropics below about 2000 meters elevation, and are an almost ubiquitous element in the flora of forest margins. Numbered among them are the stately saman (Albizia saman), which fills in urban Latin America the role of the banyan in India, and in rural Latin America provides shade and a crop of nutritious fruits for cattle; and the guamuchil (Pithecellobium dulce), a staple of rural markets, the seeds of which are enveloped in sweet pulp esteemed as a fruit and as basis for summer drinks. Most of them, however, are appreciated primarily by local people, for whom they provide nursery shade trees in the coffee orchards, timber used in construction, furniture, and as fuel, and are a rich source of honey. In these roles the mimosas of the Americas have acquired a large vocabulary of vernacular names, both in Amerindian and Latin languages, testifying to their importance in the lives of the people who use them. The last comprehensive taxonomic inventory of the mimosa group dates back to 1875. Since then much has been learned about them, and many new species have been discovered and described. Most of these exist, so far as retrievable information goes, only as names in obscure technical publications, and no one can say for sure how many are truly distinct species, or where they are to be found, or how they should be named according to current rules of botanical nomenclature. There is no modern inventory other than the patchwork of accounts that have appeared in floras of political units, many of which are mutually contradictory, one species appearing under different names in different countries, and several distinct species often masquerading under one name. Without a reliable inventory, no rational decisions can be made about the management, exploitation, or conservation of woody floras on which the function of ecological systems and the prosperity of mankind depend. Drs. Rupert Barneby and James Grimes of the New York Botanical Garden are providing this modern inventory, for the woody tropical legumes of the large genus Pithecellobium and its relatives. The results will serve as a source of verified information on which the writers and users of floras can depend, for practical identification of species, for correct scientific nomenclature, for indication of geographical ranges and habitat occurrences, and for documentation of economic uses by local peoples.

		6( 161 ). Graduate student Jose Villasenor under the guidance of Dr. Tom Elias of Rancho Santa Ana Botanic Garden is studying the Mexican and Guatemalan species of Senecio section Mulgedifolii, a poorly known group of tropical montane sunflower relatives. He plans a broad survey of features of morphology, chromosome composition, and analysis of variation in chloroplast DNA. The goals include evaluation of morphological characters that provide stable, reliable guides to the identification of species; mapping of the geographic distributions of the estimated 15 or so species throughout Mesoamerica; and inference of the evolutionary relationships among these species and with closely related groups of Senecio. Villasenor has published a number of papers on the plant resources of Mexico, and has conducted field work in several regions of the country. The broad approach he is taking to the study of plant biodiversity, encompassing both traditional morphological investigation and laboratory analysis of genetic and genomic variation, will bring increased understanding of tropical plant resources in the Americas, and in turn the research will contribute to training of the next generation of plant scientists.

		7( 163 ). Hybridization has long been important to plant breeding and the production of crop plants. Less well understood, however, is the importance of hybridization in the evolution of wild plants. In part this is because it can be difficult to detect and document the occurrence of hybridization events and to distinguish genetic novelties introduced from another species from natural genetic variation arising within a species by mutation processes. Recently, new and powerful molecular methods for analyzing directly the DNA of plants have made possible a broad analysis of this problem. Graduate student Hanson under the guidance of Dr. Loren Rieseberg of the Rancho Santa Ana Botanic Garden is studying a presumptive case of repeated hybridization events (termed introgression) between two species of yuccas of the American Southwest. Protein markers are being assayed by electrophoresis, and variation in nuclear ribosomal and plastid DNA is being analyzed by enzymatic restriction-sites. Several related yucca species are also being studied to infer the phylogenetic relationships among species in this group, in order to determine whether the two hybridizing species have shared a recent common ancestor. Recent ancestry can also lead to a pattern of shared genetic markers that could be confused with hybridization. The range of protein and DNA markers to be studied, from both nuclear and chloroplast genomes, will help distinguish between recent common ancestry and current introgression. The study will thus advance understanding of hybridization in natural plant populations, and will help in the training of a young plant scientist.

		8( 166 ). Among the living primates the genus Lemur is one of the most complicated from the taxonomic point of view. There are six recognized species and one, Lemur fulvus, occurs in seven allopatric subspecies. Their relationships to one another and the mode of their genetic differentiation is not known. The PI will examine levels of genetic differentiation associated with various stages in the process of speciation and, using data from the genus Lemur, will examine the model of allopatric speciation. Specifically, the PI will test the hypothesis that there is progressively greater genetic differentiation as comparisons are made among geographic populations, then subspecies, and finally species. These data will also be used to address the systematics of lemurs, and specifically whether Lemur fulvus is ancestral to other species in the genus, as has been proposed.

		9( 172 ). The source of ore fluids and their interactions with host rocks are of considerable concern in the understanding of the Mississippi Valley-type of Lead-Zinc deposits. In southeast Missouri there is a strong possibility that multiple basinal fluids were involved and indicate a more complex origin for sulfide orebodies in the region than previously modeled. This project will utilize sulfur isotope variations throughout the paragenetic sequence of sulfide deposition for a number of mines in the Viburnum Trend of the Southeast Missouri Lead-Zinc district. Results should clarify the role of successive pulses of ore-forming fluids and their interaction with host rocks.

		10( 173 ). Fruiting plants that rely on frugivorous birds for seed dispersal may experience important fitness consequences resulting from neighborhood influences on bird foraging movements. Birds respond to spatial patterns of fruit resource availability; thus these patterns will influence seed deposition patterns. Neighborhood effects on seed dispersal have not been studied. This research examines these effects on a tropical mistletoe species in pasture trees at Monteverde, Costa Rica. Neighborhood effects from the individual plant perspective, on three stages of dispersal; bird visitation, behavior during visits, and post- visitation movements, using an array of high and low density host and mistletoe neighborhoods (ca. 1 ha) will be determined. Mistletoes provide good systems for examining seed dispersal because bird deposition of seeds can be observed directly, and, as parasites, they have unique dispersal requirements. The study system provides a unique opportunity to examine these effects because of the arrangement of hosts and mistletoes at the site. The study will also enhance general knowledge of these little-studied tropical species. Disturbed habitats, such as the proposed site, are of increasing importance in the neotropics with the continuing loss of forests, and an understanding of ecological interactions in these habitats is likewise of increasing importance. Mistletoes can be serious pests in deforested areas where mostly susceptible trees are left standing; thus, this study is of both basic and applied interest.

		11( 181 ). Primary productivity of mangroves is an important source of nutrients for adjacent marine systems. The level of productivity is affected not only by environmental factors but also by other components of the mangrove community. Nutrient enrichment might have direct impact on aquatic food webs by increasing primary productivity of mangroves, but enrichment to coastal waters might be mitigated because as much as 20% of mangrove leaf material is removed by herbivores. The objective of this study is to determine the effects of nutrient enrichment on primary productivity of the key mangrove species, Rhizophora mangle, and on rates of insect herbivory in a controlled experiment in which nutrient availability in sediment is manipulated. The following hypotheses will be tested: 1. Nutrient enrichment causes increased leaf production and terminal branch production, internodal elongation, and flowering. 2. Nutritional quality (e.g., CNP ratio, water content) of mangrove tissues increases following nutrient enrichment of the sediment. 3. Nutritional quality of mangrove tissues correlates with rates of insect herbivory by both leaf feeders (folivores) and twig borers (xylovores). 4. Secondary use of R. mangle twigs by insects and their kin, e.g., predators, parasites, twig-nesting ants, etc., increases with rate of primary herbivory. 5. Proportions of species in the twig-feeding guild of R. mangle change following nutrient enrichment. This research will contribute to the knowledge base on mangrove ecology and may provide important information useful in conservation of mangroves.//

		12( 182 ). In recent years, genetic evidence has revealed that extra- pair mating is more widespread in apparently monogamous bird species than previously thought. The costs and benefits of extra-pair mating are poorly understood for males and females because of a paucity of data and because, until recently, the genetic techniques available were inadequate for determining paternity in natural populations. In this study, parentage of young in nests of western bluebird (Sialia mexicana) pairs in central coastal California will be determined, and behavioral, demographic and genetic data will be used to address the functional consequences of extra-pair mating. Parentage of young in nests where more than one male cares for young will be determined, as well as whether supernumerary males are nonbreeding helpers or actually father offspring in the nests at which they feed. This study will clarify the mating system of the western bluebired and will help to shed light on the extent and success of extra-pair mating as a reproductive alternative to strict monogamy.

		13( 183 ). Field experiments will be employed to investigate differences in the reproductive biology and population traits of a species of salamander. Different populations of this amphibian exhibit very different growth rates, reproductive rates, and body sizes which appear to be related to differences in environmental quality. This possibility and the alternative that the populations are genetically differentiated will be explored, using a series of experiments in which animals are raised in different environments in the field. Other experiments involve supplementally feeding animals in natural populations to ascertain the specific role of food abundance in determining these traits. Patterns of response to the different conditions will reveal how important the environment is in determining these traits.

		14( 188 ). The Plain Titmouse (Parus inornatus) varies in overall size, bill size, and color throughout its range in western North America. Ten geographic forms are currently recognized (American Ornithologists' Union, 1957, Check-list of North American Birds) on the basis of morphology and color. West of the Cascade-Sierra Nevada Mountains, the species occurs commonly in foothill oak woodland. Density is lower in the Southwest and Intermountain Regions, where populations are found patchily in pinyon-juniper or juniper habitat. The goal of this project is to integrate morphologic, molecular, and behavioral data on Parus inornatus in order to elucidate patterns and processes of divergence among populations. Differences in population structure will enable testing of alternative models of gene flow. Hypotheses concerning the role of adaptation and Pleistocene isolation also will be evaluated. A variety of modern systematic techniques will be used to examine patterns of morphologic and genetic variation within and among populations of Parus inornatus. Results to date indicate strong genetic differentiation between Pacific slope and Intermountain populations, on the order of that found between closely related species of birds. Patterns of variation in morphology (especially bill size and shape) and color support the genetic data. A quantitative estimate of gene flow will shed light on the process of genetic and morphologic divergence among populations. Because numerous bird species show similar patterns of divergence between the Pacific slope and Intermountain Regions, this study will contribute to an emerging picture of avian speciation in western North America. The results of this study will likely lead to formal taxonomic changes by the American Ornithologists' Union Committee on Classification and Nomenclature. The identification of genetically and/or morphologically distinct populations will provide critical information for managers concerned with the protection and management of pinyon-juniper or oak woodlands in the western United States. The future of oak woodlands in California is of growing concern because of increasing pressures for development in the foothills of the Cascade-Sierra, Nevada and Coast Ranges.

		15( 194 ). Organisms as diverse as plants and primates respond differentially toward conspecifics according to their genetic relatedness. Differential treatment of kin is critical to current theories of the evolution of altruism and mate choice. Yet, in surprisingly few systems have investigators identified the selective factors responsible for the evolutionary maintenance of kin-biased behavior. For anuran tadpoles, the predominant view is that associating with relatives is kin- selected because these relatives thereby accrue benefits through increased growth or predation avoidance. Recent work, however, suggests that kin associations may reflect selection to associate with the natal site (philopatry), and perhaps not with kin per se. A series of field and laboratory experiments will be proposed, aimed at elucidating the adaptive significance of aggregation behavior in tadpoles. Specifically, this study proposes to determine whether 1) DNA fingerprinting reveals evidence of philopatry, 2) aggregation formation is advantageous, and 3) aggregation formation is context-dependent. The latter two issues will be addressed by conducting field experiments in natural ponds. This study will clarify the selective factors favoring kin association behavior in tadpoles and, by implication, in certain other gregarious organisms. Examination of context-dependent behavior provides opportunity to evaluate the role of assessment in evolutionary biology.

		16( 199 ). The abundances of many plant species fluctuate widely in natural populations. Close examination of some of the most simple mathematical models of population growth has shown that in addition to the effects of random environmental noise, fluctuations in population size (from periodic oscillations to chaos) may be part of the natural dynamics of many systems. These theoretical results are seldom tested because multi- generation experiments in controlled environments are often difficult and expensive to conduct. The investigators will use experimental populations to examine 15 generations of the population dynamics of Cardamine pennsylvanica, a small, rapidly- growing greenhouse weed. Using a greenhouse weed allows them to do experiments in ecologically "natural" conditions with the precision and ease of a controlled environment. Population dynamics may be affected by different environments. Hence, some experimental populations will have variable environments and others will not. Population dynamics may be affected by the genetics of the population. Hence, some experimental populations will have little genetic variability and others will have substantial genetic variability. Genetically uniform populations may be expected to evolve little, and exhibit purely ecological responses. These experiments are essential steps toward understanding to what extent populations dynamics are driven by ecological versus genetic processes.

		17( 200 ). Nectar is the most common floral reward produced by angiosperms, but little is known about the effect of nectar production rate on pollination success. This investigation will focus on this relationship for the hummingbird-pollinated monacarpic plant Ipomopsis aggregata. The primary question of the study involves the overall effect of nectar production rate on fitness: 1) Do plants with higher nectar production rates have greater pollination success? Preliminary field evidence indicates that this does occur (at least for male function pollination success), so study of the causal mechanisms of this effect will be profitable. This question will answered by: 2) How does NPR affect standing crop? 3) How does standing crop affect visitation behavior? 4) How does visitation behavior affect pollination success? The study will investigate these questions with a variety of mutually reinforcing approaches, including computer simulation, observation of the effects of natural variation in NPR, and manipulative experiments in the field and aviary. Estimates of the effect of each mechanism in isolation can be combined to produce an estimate of pollination success that can be compared with benchmark values from Question 1, testing the adequacy of the mechanisms proposed. The research will increase understanding, not only of the fitness consequences of variation in NPR, but the mechanisms through which such effects may be expressed.

		18( 214 ). Sugar maple is one of the most widespread and abundant deciduous forest trees in eastern North America. Populations of sugar maple continue to expand in forests in the corn belt states of the U.S., but at the same time appear to be declining in parts of the northeastern U.S. and southeastern Canada. A number of causes for this "sugar maple decline" have been suggested, including effects of both gaseous air pollutants (especially ozone), and acidic precipitation. Rather than acting as the proximate cause of death of individual trees, such diffuse environmental factors act by placing trees under chronic stress. Such stress-weakened trees then become more susceptible to attack by insect pests or diseases which actually kill the tree. In this study, the investigators will examine the effects of ambient ozone, and of slightly elevated ozone, on a number of important, basic physiological processes in sugar maple: photosynthesis, respiration, transport of sugars among plant parts, and accumulation of starch stores for overwintering. They hypothesize that ozone injury to leaves will reduce the photosynthetic rate and force the plant to use more of the energy it does obtain through photosynthesis to repair damage. In addition, they hypothesize that the system the plant uses to transport sugars from leaves to roots may be directly damaged by ozone. These changes will have the effect of reducing the amount of food (as starch and sugar) that the plant can accumulate for survival over the winter. Thus, they expect overwinter mortality to increase, and growth during the subsequent spring to be lower, in plants exposed to ozone. The investigators will also extend these experiments to screen individuals from populations in areas of sugar maple decline and unaffected areas to determine if sensitivity to ozone varies geographically. The results of these experiments may reveal much about the basic ecophysiology of sugar maple, and will also allow insight into the more applied problem of sugar maple decline.

		19( 215 ). Sedges are perennial herbs that resemble grasses, with long, narrow leaves and small, unisexual flowers that are mostly wind pollinated. Sedges have a worldwide distribution but are most diverse in North America and eastern Asia. They grow in a wide range of habitats, and many species are restricted to particular local environments. Sedges play important roles in wetland succession, peat development, and stabilization of slopes, and they provide food and shelter to wildlife. Despite their ecological importance, their taxonomy is in poor condition, with large numbers of species described on the basis of only a few, often unreliable morphological features. Graduate student Robert Naczi under the guidance of faculty sponsor Anton Reznicek at the University of Michigan is studying the taxonomy and evolution of sedges of the genus Carex section Griseae, a group of about 17 species native to eastern North America. Data from the study of morphology, anatomy, and chromosomes will be used to delimit coherent species, and these will be mapped against soil substrate and geographical range. Comparisons with other sedge groups will be made to hypothesize a likely phylogeny for the group, for future testing with molecular data. The results of the project should be a model investigation useful to systematists and ecologists worldwide who are interested in the biology and evolution of sedges.

		20( 218 ). Ecotypes of Hemizonia Luzulaefolia (Asteraceae) will be used to examine predictions of two theories concerned with the evolution of plant defenses against herbivores: the resource availability and the apparency hypotheses. The resource availability hypothesis predicts that plants adapted to low- resource environments should allocate proportionally more resources to defense than plants adapted to high-resource environments. Two ecotypes of H.luzulaefolia (one adapted to resource-poor serpentine soil and one adapted to resource-rich sandstone soil) in 1) a reciprocal transplant garden experiment to assess this prediction in terms of plant fitness and 2) a container experiment to examine underlying eco-physiological mechanisms) will be used. H.luzulaefolia produces non-resinous rosette leaves prior to flowering and resinous leaves (presumably a defense against herbivores) when flowering is initiated. In addition, two ecotypes differ in flowering time (spring vs.fall) and in quantity of resins produced. The apparency hypothesis predicts that this variation in the timing and quantity of resin production is attributable to variation in vulnerability to herbivores. This idea will be tested by placing different growth stages of the two ecotypes into the grassland at several times during the season and measure herbivore damage. It is anticipated that results generated from these experiments will provide an empirical base for modifying current theory on the evolution of herbivore defense. //

		21( 228 ). Whether natural selection acts on parents to control the sex of offspring they produce is an important question in evolutionary biology. Perhaps the most extreme example of parental control over offspring sex occurs in colonies of ants. Individual colonies will often produce hundreds of individuals of a single sex. The reasons for such specialization remain unknown. This project tests alternative hypotheses proposed to explain specialization in production of the sexes by ants. Determining the conditions under which colonies produce one sex vs. the other may also have practical applications in controlling reproductive potential of pest species.

		22( 233 ). The goals of this dissertation research project to be performed by Steven O. Shattuck and Professor Philip S. Ward of the University of California at Davis are to define genera within the ant sub-family Dolichoderinae (about 1000 species worldwide, in 31 genera) and attempt to demonstrate their monophyly (having one ancestral origin) based on morphological traits of workers, queens, males, and larvae. Other goals are to analyze cladistic relationships among these groups using rigorous methods of phylogenetic inference, develop a key to all known genera based on the above-mentioned character analysis, and compile a species- level catalog of all taxa (including information on current generic status, type locality, and if available, location and number of type specimens). Preserved material at existing museum collections in the United States, Canada, and the United Kingdom will be examined for characters suitable for cladistic analysis. Hypotheses about relationships among genera will be evaluated by examining congruence between worker, queen, and male ant data sets and by statistical estimation of cladogram confidence limits. Results will identify natural units for alpha-taxonomic studies, provide a foundation for species-level phylogenetic investigations by elucidating sister-group relationships among genera, and assist in access to the taxonomic literature on the Dolichoderinae.

		23( 254 ). Plants produce many more ovules than develop into seeds. Some ovules may not develop into seeds because pollen tubes fail to reach the ovary and fertilize ovules; other ovules are fertilized and then aborted. The failure of an ovule to develop into a seed can also depend on the genotype of the pollen donor. In general, seeds sired by foreign pollen are more likely to be developed over seeds sired by self pollen when both types of seeds are competing in the same fruit. There have been few investigations attempting to determine the mechanism of preferential development of outcrossed seeds although many authors have hypothesized that variation in pollen tube growth is important. Pollen tubes of certain donors may simply not get to the ovary and fertilize any ovules. Patterns of preferential development could also be caused by selective abortion if seeds sired by self pollen are aborted with greater frequency than seeds sired by foreign pollen. Despite the possible role of seed abortion in determining patterns of preferential development, abortion of seeds sired by specific pollen donors has not been examined in any plant. The proposed work differs from previous studies because it will look at both variation in pollen tube growth and seed abortion. The PIs have developed a technique that enables them to determine the genetic makeup of ovules as they begin to abort. Preliminary data suggest that seeds sired by self pollen are aborted with greater frequency than seeds sired by foreign pollen.

		24( 278 ). A conventional scanning electron microscope will be acquired for use in a multiuser, campus-wide facility at Mississippi State University. The high resolution achievable with a research-grade scanning electron microscope is essential to the projects of six major users and six minor users from diverse disciplines. The former projects deal with the morphology of (1) fossil ostracods, (2) sensory receptors of water mites, (3) scent organs of moths, (4) seed coverings, (5) moth sensory organs and organs of host plants, and (6) fossil and recent diatoms. The projects of the six minor users deal with (1) intestinal nutrient transport in piglets, (2) particle sizing, (3) fungal infection of plant tissue, (4) paleomagnetism, (5) fungus and nematode colonization of roots, and (6) crustacean blood clotting and wound healing.

		25( 281 ). There has been much debate in recent years over whether countries will tend in the long run to converge to the same level of productivity which can be measured in terms of per capita income. In practice, the debate concerns the question of whether poor countries tend to have higher per capita income growth rates than rich ones, or put another way: is there a tendency for poor countries to "catch up"? The purpose of this research is to integrate data and growth theory to focus on the question of economic convergence. This project will involve an empirical and theoretical investigation of the causes of convergence or lack thereof. The approach taken to the question of catching up begins by restating the question as one concerning the effects of initial conditions on subsequent growth. It is the contention in this study that initial per capita income is too aggregate a measure of initial conditions on which to base our expectations of a country's subsequent growth. By disaggregating initial conditions in a growth-theoretic context it is possible to greatly improve our understanding of why some poor countries have grown much faster than rich countries while others have note. This project is important because it will provide new insights about the prospects for economic growth in the less developed countries.

		26( 288 ). The life cycle of freshwater unionid mussels is atypical among bivalves and involves both a free-living adult and a parasitic larva, the glochidium. Following fertilization, developing embryos are incubated in the water tubes of the mother's gills where they may remain for several months before being released into the water column and becoming parasitic on fish. The principal objective of this study is to assess the morphological and physiological changes that occur within the gills of brooding female Anodonta cataracta, an abundant freshwater mussel in North Carolina. During brooding, two of the mussel's four gills become packed with nearly a million glochidia, causing the gills to swell to up to thirty times their non-brooding size. The major goals of the proposed research include quantifying the morphological changes that occur within the marsupial gills, comparing the pumping and filtration dynamics of brooding and non-brooding mussels, determining the effect of brooding on oxygen uptake and oxygen extraction efficiency of mussels, and assessing the activity of the cilia responsible for irrigation both the marsupial and non-marsupial gills. The results will provide a more complete understanding of the reproductive biology of A. cataracta, especially the effect of glochidial brooding and release on the physiology and gill morphology of adult females. This information also may have application for the management and conservation of other freshwater bivalves including threatened and endangered species.

		27( 290 ). Insect herbivores can have large effects on the performance, life histories, and demography of plants, and often exert strong natural selection on plant populations. In addition, plants are often exposed simultaneously to stresses from biotic (i.e. herbivory, parasitism) and abiotic (i.e. resource limitation, heat) sources. This project will use the tallgrass prairie perennial Silphium integrifolium (Asteraceae) and one of its major herbivores, the gall wasp Antistrophus silphii (Hymenoptera:Cynipidae), as a model system to examine how herbivory, nutrient stresses, and water stress interact to affect life history and physiological responses of plants. Experiments will address two specific questions. 1. How does gall infestation affect life-history traits and fitness components of Silphium intergrifolium? 2. How do nutrient limitation and water stress influence the physiological and growth responses of plants to gall insect attack? To answer the first question, plant physiology (i.e. photosynthesis, water potential), growth, biomass allocation, and reproduction will be measured over a two-year period in experimentally galled and gall-free plants growing in natural field populations. The second question will be addressed in a common garden experiment in which gall frequencies and nutrient/water availabilities will be manipulated in a factorial design, and physiology, growth, and reproductive output will again be measured.

		28( 295 ). Plants vary dramatically in the ways in which they defend themselves from herbivorous animals. Even within a species, physical and mechanical defenses differ depending on environment, historical factors and genetic composition. Variation in plant defenses will be examined to determine the causes of variability, and subsequently, the costs to the plant of an investment in defense. The significance of this work lies in relating the natural variation in plant properties to a selective force, herbivory, and determining the effect on plant productivity. This work is central to understanding plant-herbivore interactions.

		29( 296 ). Several critical issues are examined related to fatigue crack initiation and microcrack growth. Included are the effects of subsurface environmental species on fatigue; the role of surface reactivity on fatigue life; theoretical analysis of the slip band spacing; and effects of material type. The significance of subsurface incorporation of environmental species on fatigue is determined by measuring fatigue crack initiation in selected gaseous environments (oxygen and other selected gases). The correlation between slip band spacing and fatigue life is examined to extend current theory on periodic slip band arrays and their influence on crack initiation.

		30( 323 ). The ability of anthropologists to determine aspects of an animal's diet from morphological characteristics of its dentition has greatly increased in recent years, especially through the use of new techniques such as SEM (scanning electron microscope) examination of minute wear characteristics of the teeth. The Principal Investigators will utilize this technique to determine food categories of a diverse group mammals, including primates, and use this information to make inferences about the diet of an important group of Early Cenozoic primates, the Omomyidae. This study will be the first to assess quantitatively hypotheses about dietary reconstruction of early fossil primates. The potential application of this study for understanding dietary aspects of other fossil taxa is great.

		31( 333 ). Gaeumannomyces graminis, a soil-borne, filamentous fungus, causes crown and root disease of wheat, barley and rice and for several reasons this plant-pathogen interaction provides an excellent model for fungal adhesion to host tissue. First, the fungus, in response to plastic as well as plant surfaces, produces specialized attachment cells (hyphopodia), which can be at least partially purified. Second, G. graminis is not an obligate parasite and can be easily cultured. Third, the fungus can be manipulated by both classical and molecular genetic techniques. One of our goals is to determine if hyphopodia are important for fungal pathogenicity as suggested by preliminary work. Gene disruption with transforming plasmid DNA will be used to generate more hyp strains which lack the ability to produce hyphopodia. After they are genetically analyzed, mutants will be characterized as to their colonizing and pathogenic potential.

		32( 341 ). This project tests the predictions of 'patch dynamics' community ecology models at the level of the whole community. It will help explain the diversity of insect communities and the evolutionary diversity of insects as a whole. 'Patch dynamics' models describe how dispersal, intra-specific aggregation, and disturbance allow competing species or predator and prey species to coexist on patchy ephemeral resources. Two specific questions will be answered: 1. Does community species diversity increase as the spatial patchiness of a resource is increased? 2. Does community diversity increase over several generations as the temporal discontinuity of the resource increases? Three experiments will manipulate laboratory-grown mushrooms as a patchy ephemeral resource for insects. The first experiment will determine the length of exposure that will give maximum insect diversity on mushrooms in the other experiments. The second experiment will compare the diversity of insects supported by a standard mass of mushrooms divided into either one, four, or sixteen patches. The third experiment will compare diversity over several generations between identical spatial arrays of mushrooms that are renewed at different temporal intervals.

		33( 342 ). The phylogenetic relationships among the orders of otophysan fishes and the families of catfishes will be investigated using nucleotide sequence variation of ribosomal RNA. Ribosomal RNA sequences will be obtained using a primer-extension sequencing method applied directly to RNA samples isolated from tissue samples. Statistical tests will be applied to these data to resolve alternative hypotheses previously generated from morphological data. The evolutionary events underlying the multiple derivations of complex morphological systems such as the elastic spring apparatus and palatine-maxillary mechanism will be evaluated in the context of a molecular phylogeny. The resulting molecular phylogenies will also be used to test predictions of the vicariance and dispersalist models of vertebrate radiation and to reevaluate major trends of morphological evolution among otophysan fishes. The phylogenetic information contained in different parts of the ribosome will be examined to identify a general range of divergence times over which ribosomal sequence variation is likely to be informative for teleost fishes.

		34( 344 ). Many organisms possessing a haplodiploid genetic system are known to preferentially allocate maleness and femaleness to individual offspring in response to environmental conditions that differentially confer advantages to either sex. (A haplodiploid species is one in which individuals of one sex--usually males--are produced from unfertilized eggs, while fertilized eggs produce individuals of the opposite sex). For instance, parasitic wasps will most likely oviposit a female (fertilized) egg in a relatively large high quality prey individual since the ovipositing female stands to gain more grandoffspring through the function of large, robust daughters than through the function of large sons. In contrast, the female will probably gain more grandoffspring through the function of small sons than through small daughters and will thus most likely allocate male (unfertilized) eggs to small, low quality, hosts. Differential sex allocation of the form just described is well-studied in the parasitic wasps. However, the factors affecting sex allocation in haplodiploid herbivores are much less understood, though these herbivores are very common and quite often cause major economic damage (e.g., spider mites and sawflies). In addition, herbivory is probably a primitive state in many haplodiploid groups and an understanding of gender control will allow a better understanding of the evolution of herbivory. The proposed research will examine the relationship between sex allocation in haplodiploid herbivores and the variable quality of host-plants encountered. By examining diverse groups of haplodiploid herbivores, i.e., sawflies and spider mites, in which haplodiploidy arose independently, the investigators hope to define the evolutionary generalities that led to the success of this genetic system. A further aspect of this research is the relationship of population sex ratios to rates of population increase. By determining host-plant factors that result in the production of relatively greater proportions of females, the investigators will also begin to determine the host-plant factors responsible for periodic outbreaks of haplodiploid herbivores. In addition to survivorship, growth rate and egg production, the relative proportion of females in a population is a parameter with potentially large consequences for population growth rates. The ability to alter the sex ratio of hapodiploid herbivores through manipulation of their host plants could lead to an additional method of controlling many pests in agriculture and forestry. *** //

		35( 348 ). Genetic relationships in natural populations of animals and plants are a basic issue in evolutionary biology. Traditional techniques used to study natural populations have often been found inadequate for describing the true genetic variability of populations and the genetic relationships between populations. In the proposed research, the recently developed technique of DNA fingerprinting will be used to investigate the genetic relationships between natural populations of Poecilia latipinna, a small fish occurring along the coastline of the Southeastern U.S. This fish has been partially genetically characterized using other techniques. Data suggest that populations of this species may be more genetically distinct than heretofore determined. DNA fingerprinting should reveal a greater level of differentiation between populations of this fish than has yet been demonstrated. If so, DNA fingerprinting could be a potential tool for other population genetic studies of both a basic and applied nature. If DNA fingerprinting can be shown to be a useful tool for describing natural populations, evolutionary biologists and managers of natural populations will have available to them a relatively simple technique with greater power for detecting genetic relationships than any method previously used.

		36( 351 ). The Antarctic is now experiencing large springtime losses of stratospheric ozone, resulting in an increase in ultraviolet B (UVB, 280-320nm) radiation. The magnitude of ultraviolet radiation reaching the surface now approaches that measured in tropical latitudes. Perhaps more importantly, UVB radiation has increased in the Antarctic while both UVA (320-400nm) and photosynthetically available radiation (PAR, 400-700nm) have remained unchanged. Recent improvements in atmospheric modeling and technology in oceanographic instrumentation will be used in a six week field study during the austral spring 1990. The prime objective will be to document the impact of UV radiation on the phytoplankton community during the ice-edge spring bloom. During this time, oceanographic processes create favorable conditions for increased UVB susceptibility. Biological and bio-optical information will be used to define and quantify linkages between ozone-dependent oscillations in UV to PAR ratios and phytoplankton productivity. Special emphasis will be placed on defining biological restraints imposed by enhanced UVB and altered UVB:UVA:PAR ratios on the balance of UVB photodamage to photorepair, photoprotective and photosynthetic mechanisms operating in the Southern Ocean. The overall aim is to test the hypothesis that phytoplankton in Antarctic waters are adversely influenced by ozone depletion.

		37( 368 ). This research will study the processes that generate overdispersed distributions of the hematophagous ectoparasite Oeciacus vicarius (Cimicidae) on it's colonial host, the cliff swallow (Hirundo pyrrhonata). The study will combine observations on the spatial and temporal pattern of parasitism with field and laboratory experiments on the movement of individual parasites. By fumigating cliff swallow nests to remove parasites and reintroducing fixed numbers of marked bugs, the study will investigate how factors such as host quality, host nest density, and conspecific density affect the dispersal activity of individual bugs. Female swallow bugs will be fed on swallow nestlings of various ages to determine the advantage of feeding on hosts of different quality. The dispersal paths of individual swallow bugs under natural conditions and laboratory arenas will be observed to see if their movements are random or conform to theories of directed dispersal on a signal gradient (kinesis). In order to understand the importance of intercolony dispersal of bugs, whole colonies will be fumigated and recolonization rates recorded. The predictions of mathematical models will then be compared, based on individual movement data to observed parasite distributions. The goal is to understand how the movement behavior of individual bugs translates into an emergent pattern of parasite infestation.


	Top Words:
		1. SPECIES
		2. PLANT
		3. POPULATIONS
		4. GENETIC
		5. PLANTS


Cluster 11

	Documents:
		1( 13 ). This research involves the quantum field theory of fermions on the Poincare disk and the hard hexagon model - a lattice gas model in statistical mechanics. The research on the quantum theory of fermions will involve expressing the Schwinger functions in terms of certain nonlinear deformation equations. These equations will then be analyzed both in the Euclidean limit and in the conformal field theory limit. An important aspect of this work is the extension of the existing theory to the noneuclidean setting which may lay the groundwork for extensions to Riemann surfaces of a more general type. The research on the hard hexagon model will involve derivations of differential equations for the partition function and density functions. An attempt will be made to extend these equations to the hard square lattice gas, a model that is 'not solvable' by present techniques. This research is in the general area of theoretical physics and deals with isomonodromy deformations and applications to conformal field theory, statistical mechanics, and scattering theory.

		2( 16 ). The principal investigator will study rods, shells and solid bodies composed of various elastic, plastic and viscous materials using geometrically exact theories for nonlinear constitutive equations, in order to treat new nonlinear effects, thresholds and instabilities. He will study also dissipative mechanisms in solid materials such as shock waves and contact discontinuities. Two-and three-dimensional solid bodies are complicated objects to study when they are composed of elastic or plastic material. The reason is that such objects often behave counter- intuitively when subjected to loading or stress. In order to help understand these materials and predict their responses to applied forces it is important to have mathematical models that are realistic and at the same time amenable to solution. This proposal will formulate several such models and attempt to find meaningful solutions.

		3( 18 ). Four areas of mathematical research are represented in this project. In general terms, the work reflects the application of methods of harmonic analysis to problems in the theory of partial differential equations and operators. One theme concerns what are now called Fatou theorems for classes of nonlinear elliptic equations, including the important p-Laplacian. The object is to determine, for nonnegative solutions, the extent to which the solution has nontangential boundary values. A primary goal is to obtain basic estimates on solutions which depend on the shape of the boundary but do not depend on the smoothness of the coefficients in the equation. In the same spirit, work will also be done investigating existence questions for second order elliptic systems and higher order elliptic operators defined in nonsmooth domains. By this, one usually means domains which occur in the physical world, but which do not have very smooth boundaries. Corners and edges are allowed for example. It is only in the last decade that any major progress has been made toward understanding the extent to which one may establish a good existence and regularity theory. In the preceding, the major results obtained used techniques of classical double layer potential theory mixed with modern operator theory. Work will continue on the operators developed for the above purposes. The focus here will be to analyze the spectrum of the operators and read from it information about the operators. The spectrum is known to consist of real numbers for classical operators and the conjecture to be studied is that it lies in a symmetric interval of length one-half about the origin. Finally, work will be done on the Dirichlet problem for second order nondivergence form elliptic operators. Although a highly developed theory for such operators has existed since the early 1950's, there has always been a standing assumption that the coefficients of the operator be smooth. This work breaks with that tradition in seeking to define what one would mean by a reasonable solution when the operator is formed from merely bounded coefficients. Even though one must expect solutions with discontinuities and distributional derivatives, the potential for application of this work is very high.

		4( 21 ). This award provides additional support for research by a Presidential Young Investigator working on problems of Fourier analysis related to the microlocal analysis of partial differential operators and the theory of Fourier integral operators. Work will be done in developing a microlocal version of the maximal theorem of Bourgain. The result concerns the maximal operator associated with the Radon transform (over spheres) which was shown to preserve the Lebesgue spaces for powers greater than two. The averaging may be viewed as a Fourier integral operator of negative order one-half. Efforts will be made to determine if the same result holds for any family of nondegererate operators of the same order, depending smoothly on a linear parameter. Some additional conditions have to be established since a total generalization is known to be impossible. A related type of operator studied by Carleson and Sjolin is known to preserve the fourth-power Lebesgue spaces. In this project, work will be done in expanding the operators to integral transforms involving exponential of the Laplace-Beltrami operator. If this is possible then the Carleson-Sjolin theorem for Bochner-Riesz summation in the plane can be extended to compact manifolds. Other work involves the question of embedded eigenvalues for Schrodinger operators. If the potential is bounded by the reciprocal of the variable, then Hormander showed that eigenfunctions which are small at infinity actually vanish everywhere. The next step in analyzing this phenomenon is to determine exact conditions on the potential to guarantee the same result. An immediate goal will be to find the correct function space (one of the local Lebesgue spaces) for embedding the potential.

		5( 43 ). This research will apply asymptotic approximation techniques in the study of the dynamics of molecular systems in the so- called Born-Oppenheimer limit. In particular, the principal investigator will consider scattering problems, the effects of electron energy level crossing, avoided crossings and the effects of oscillating electromagnetic fields. This will be accomplished using analytical and numerical methods. Most molecules consist of complicated systems of electrons whose behavior determines the macroscopic (or bulk) properties of materials. It is especially important to have mathematical models of these electron systems, since understanding the behavior of the electrons enables us to understand the conductivity of a material, for example. In this proposal the principal investigator will use analytical and numerical methods to study how electrons behave in crossing from one energy level to another.

		6( 50 ). Work on this project focuses on two areas related to the study of solutions of elliptic partial differential equations. These are the analysis of the biharmonic and polyharmonic equations on non-smooth domains and boundary value problems for second order elliptic divergence form operators with non-smooth coefficients. In past work it was discovered that the range of solvability of higher order elliptic operators on non-smooth domains depended on the dimension of the underlying domain. There remains a gap in the range in which the solution will have a finite norm (above the quadratic). If the domain has dimension four or greater then solutions exist with unbounded p-norms for some value of p greater than two. But the first value of p is not known, nor is it known whether this gap reduces to zero as the dimension increases. Work will be done in an effort to obtain sharp estimates on this range. There is a close connection between the study of differential operators on non-smooth domains and those with non-smooth coefficients. Research will concentrate on establishing representations of solutions through integrals of boundary values. This is a particularly delicate matter. In the case of smooth coefficient operators, the integrals are Lebesgue integrals (the harmonic measure is absolutely continuous with respect to surface measure). This is not necessarily the case in general. Work will be done in establishing criteria which will still guarantee the integral representation through approximation procedures. Once these are established, one can then begin to study the behavior of solutions as the variable is made to approach the domain boundary.

		7( 51 ). This project is focused on three areas of mathematical analysis: (1) periods of hyperelliptic Riemann surfaces and Hamiltonian mechanics, (2) matrix problems, and (3) long-time behavior of integrable systems. The first topic involves the investigation of a new connection between the arithmetic- geometric mean and the computation of hyperelliptic integrals on the one hand, and Hamiltonian mechanics on the other. The second topic involves the analysis of high accuracy algorithms to compute the singular values of a matrix. This part of the project is also concerned with the problem of computing the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of products of matrices. A central role in the analysis is played by integrable Hamiltonian systems which interpolate the iterates of the singular value / eigenvalue algorithms at integer times. The third topic involves an analysis of the long-time behavior of integrable systems, specifically of the Toda shock problem. Attention will be focused on the case of low shock speed, the more general case for higher shock speeds, the stability problem in which a doubly infinite Toda lattice in equilibrium is perturbed locally, the question of the rate and the manner in which the eigenvalues fill the "phantom" band, and the analysis of the long-time behavior of the nonlinear wave equations in the Gel'fand-Dikii hierarchy. The work in this project deals with spectral problems and inverse spectral problems. The project is concerned with applications to Hamiltonian mechanics, with the development of algorithms which improve the accuracy of the computed singular values of a matrix, and with the study of the long-time behavior of integrable systems.

		8( 55 ). This research is to develop further the theoretical basis for determining 3-D earth structure from long-period seismic data. The next major advance will be to invert a dataset that is an order of magnitude larger, of the order of 50,000 source-receiver pairs which will be developed elsewhere. Attention here will be focused on the accuracy and possible biases of the various approximations and techniques that will have to be employed in such a large-scale study. Specific topics to be addressed are the accurate computation of synthetic long-period seismograms, evaluation of approximate methods and inversion techniques, and theoretical studies of geometrical optics, anisotropy, and the Born approximation.

		9( 62 ). This project will cover three basic interrelated areas of applied mathematics. The first is concerned with large amplitude motions both quasi periodic and almost periodic in dynamical systems of many degrees of freedom. The principal investigator will develop new methods of study, going beyond the KAM theory for small perturbations, that utilize a novel nonlinear p.d.e. approach. The second related topic involves vortex dynamics of an ideal inviscid fluid. Here the principal investigator will research the outstanding problems of leapfrogging of vortex rings, classes of vortex cores, and vortex breakdown of bubble and spiral type. Finally, the principal investigator will study of "flux phenomenon" in the new theories of high Tc superconductivity, an area of prime importance in high technology. All these areas require deep understanding of nonlinear science and its associated mathematical structures. This has been the central focus of the investigator's research for over two decades.

		10( 63 ). This project continues mathematical research centering on topics in the theory of several complex variables. The work involves studies of complex manifolds, representing the geometric point of view, together with analytic investigations into value distributions and continuity properties of complex functions. One primary focus concerns what is known as the Hartogs phenomenon whereby a holomorphic function of several variables defined in a region surrounding a domain (such as in a complex annulus) continues as a holomorphic function to the inner region. Work will be done in extending the idea in two directions. The first is to determine the extent to which a separate analyticity implies joint, while the second is concerned with the Hartogs phenomenon as it relates to mapping into complex manifolds. Although many manifolds reflect this property, some do not. The outstanding problem remains one of giving conditions on the target manifolds so that the extension property holds for all mappings into the manifold. Value distribution theory is concerned with the extent to which holomorphic functions defined in the space of several complex variables can omit or assume given values. The measurement of such affinities involves generalizations of the classical Nevanlinna theory which was developed for functions of a single variable during the first decades of this century. For nonconstant functions, their affinity for any value is almost always the same as for any other. The exceptions represent the deficiencies of the function - the measure of the set of deficiencies will be of primary concern during this investigation.

		11( 80 ). Research in theoretical elementary particle physics will include work at the interface between particle physics and cosmology and work motivated by the superstring models of the basic forces and particles. The cosmology - related research will deal with the role of quantum mechanics in the inflation of the universe and with the generation of galaxy - sized structure in the universe. This research addresses very important issues relating to the evolution of the universe.

		12( 84 ). The principal investigators will investigate several questions in stochastic analysis, most of which involve white noise calculus and its applications. In particular, they will study the localization of forward and backward integrals, multiple stochastic integrals, existence and uniqueness of stochastic differential equations with anticipating coefficients, comparison with other approaches in the theory of anticipating stochastic differential equations.

		13( 98 ). With this award the principal investigator will continue his modelling of elliptical galactic systems and the analytical solution of the model problems. In particular, he will construct self-consistent models of elliptical galaxies by means of Staeckel potentials. The main reasons for using Staeckel potentials are that they allow the same major orbit families as those found from numerical simulations of realistic galactic models and they lead to mathematically tractable problems. The aspect of astronomy that most of us are familiar with involves the use of telescopes to make observations of stars and galaxies. Another aspect that is less well known involves the construction of mathematical models of celestial objects in order to gain a greater understanding of the physics of stellar systems. This research involves the construction and analysis of a model for elliptical galaxies by means of a potential that describes an interacting system of many bodies.

		14( 106 ). One investigator will study problems in the areas of rigidity theorems for Riemannian manifolds, the structure of manifolds without conjugate points, and sharp isoperimetric inequalities. A second investigator will study related problems in the areas of degenerate systems of partial differential equations, isospectral deformations of Riemannian structures, and minimal isometric embeddings of spherical space forms in spheres. The problems to be investigated in this project arise from an example due to Milnor of two isospectral manifolds which are not isometric. While the original example was sixteen dimensional, more recently three dimensional examples have been constructed. Analogously, one might ask if two round drums which have the same rough shape and which sound the same when struck, have the same exact shape. In fact, they must. These two investigators will study related deep questions for higher dimensional hypersurfaces.

		15( 119 ). The aim of this project is the analysis of classes of holomorphic functions of several complex variables. The regularity of holomorphic functions defined in a domain becomes less definite as the independent variable approaches the boundary of the domain. This boundary behavior is the main thrust of this activity. Boundary properties of functions defined in a disc in one complex dimension are well understood. A natural analogue in several dimensions is the ball. Even in this case, information is far from complete. In the study of holomorphic Sobolev and Besov spaces, it can be shown that functions have unique limits on approach to the boundary provided certain exceptional sets are avoided. Some progress has been made in characterizing exceptional sets in terms of their capacity. Further effort will be devoted to refining these results. A related line of study will consider the complex tangential derivative of functions in Lipschitz classes. It appeared that when the Lipschitz constant is equal to one-half, the tangential derivatives in the class are p-th power integrable for all values of the parameter. This turned out to be false, leading to a reconsideration of how functions in this class behave near the boundary. Work will be done on the question. A second line of investigation concerns the restriction of holomorphic Sobolev spaces to complex tangential manifolds. There is ample evidence to suggest that the restricted classes are exactly the real Besov spaces. Work will continue on the problem of determining when a function in such a Besov space can be extended to a holomorphic function of the same type.

		16( 121 ). Principal Investigators proposed to study Hagia Sophia, a historical structure built in the 14th Century. Numerical and experimental analyses are used to model the dynamic responses. Stiffness degradation is to be quantified. Computationally intensive inverse analysis is to be used to delineate material properties.

		17( 127 ). This program explores the defect structure of quasicrystals, superconducting oxides, and amorphous alloys using the technique of atomic pair distribution function analysis (PDF). The PDF method has been employed primarily for amorphous solids and liquids and is now being used in the examination of non-periodic atomic displacements in more ordered solids. The PDF method is refined further in this research, which examines the statistical noise, lattice dynamics, and techniques for improved accuracy in the differential anomalous x-ray scattering experiments. The main focus of the grant is on developing understanding of defect structure in the above materials, which have high incidence of atoms which deviate in position from their average sites.

		18( 133 ). Professor Casazza will conduct research on several problems in the theory of Banach spaces. They involve (i) uniqueness of unconditional and symmetric structures in finite dimensional spaces, (ii) various forms of the Approximation Property, and (iii) the existence of prime Banach spaces. This award will support research in the geometry of Banach spaces. In finite dimensions, all vector spaces are essentially the same. But in the infinite dimensional situation primarily of interest here, this is far from the case. Banach spaces are infinite dimensional spaces with the additional structure introduced by varying notions of distance between points in the space. Such spaces have wide application in mathematics, both pure and applied.

		19( 141 ). This project continues mathematical work on modeling, analysis and design of numerical algorithms for physical systems, the behavior of which is heavily influenced by non-local effects in time, space and both. Three classes of such systems are investigated. The first comprises viscoelastic and thermoelastic time-memory models, the second concerns interface problems arising in elastic and electromagnetic scattering by inhomogeneous obstacles, some of which involve non-local operators in space and time, while the third focuses on reaction- diffusion problems in population genetics with state-dependent diffusion velocity. A central theme of this research is a careful study of the strength of damping mechanisms induced by non-local effects and the influence of damping on well-posedness, including variational formulation techniques, asymptotic behavior, and approximation of non-local effects to facilitate easier implementation of numerical methods. The problems require the development of delicate analytical and numerical techniques coupled with a thorough understanding of the underlying physics. Some of this work builds on a recent paper in which the concept of steady-state power loss is introduced as a measure of the strength of damping for models with singular kernels. It is expected that this point of view will prove valuable in the study of global well-posedness and limiting behavior.

		20( 142 ). This award will support collaborative work between Professor Mihir Sen of the University of Notre Dame and Professor Eduardo Ramos of the Solar Energy Laboratory in Temixco, Mexico. The researchers intend to study nucleate boiling from single-and multiple capillary sites. Variable heat flux will be used as a control parameter to analyze the sequence of bifurcations leading from periodic boiling up to chaos. In order to assess the contribution of phase change to the observed phenomena, a similar study without phase change, but with the controlled injection of an inert gas, will also be carried out. In this case the mass flow rate of the inert gas will be the relevant bifurcation parameter. The bulk of the phase change work will be done in the U.S., while most of the inert gas studies will be in Mexico. One part of the work will consist of extensive observation and interpretation of an experimental nature. Another will be the development of a suitable analytical model for the processes which can qualitatively explain the observed phenomena. Though the cylindrical capillary structure chosen for study is the simplest geometry from a basic point of view, results from this study are expected to advance our fundamental understanding of boiling. As such the proposed work has potential application to the design of thermal equipment operating under boiling conditions and to the preparation of structured surfaces for enhanced heat transfer.

		21( 145 ). With this award the principal investigator will continue his application of asymptotic methods of singular perturbation type to the study of bifurcation problems and moving boundary problems that arise from reaction-diffusion systems. In particular, he will investigate so-called singular bifurcation problems, wherein small changes in the bifurcation parameter can cause large responses in the system, laser instabilities, and the changing time history of the moving interface in certain pharmaceutical problems involving the time-release of medication. This proposal is concerned with bifurcation phenomena. As an illustration, stand a plastic ruler on its end and push on the top end. If you do not push very hard nothing happens. But if you push sufficiently hard the first thing that happens is that the ruler bows, either to the left or to the right. We call this a bifurcation: the configuration of the straight ruler has split (bifurcated) into one of two possible shapes. Applying still more force to the ruler results in an even number of bowed shapes having more and more curves. The principal investigator will study the number of solutions that bifurcate from a given solution of systems of equations that govern lasers and release of chemicals in the body.

		22( 151 ). This research will focus on four areas: 1) integrability theory for linear differential systems and perturbation theory for the feedback linearization equations of nolinear control theory. This work will support the program of engineering research of nonlinear control of air-space-craft at NASA-Ames Research Center directed by Dr. George Meyer. This research was cited in the recent NSF Report on Control Theory as a prime example of the practical success of the application of geometric methodology. 2) Geometric and sheaf-theoretic methodology in the knowledge-representation and computation theory side of computer science. This will provide mathematical support for the Discrete Event System and Artificial Intelligence research. 3) Lie- theoretic methods in numerical analysis developing new geometric and Lie-theoretic methodology for the numerical algorithms of linear algebra and differential equations. 4) Infinite pseudogroups in elementary particle physics looking for the ntural mathematical synthesis of String and Standard Model gauge theories, utilizing the Cartan-Matshushima-Guillemin-Sternberg- Conn theory of structure of infinite Lie pseudogroups.

		23( 153 ). This research in mathematical physics will use the renormalization group technique to analyze the short and long distance behavior of mathematical models with many (and infinite) degrees of freedom. The specific topics include establishing infrared asymptotic freedom for the effective photon interaction in quantum electrodynamics, studying the Kosterlitz-Thouless phase of the two dimensional classical Coulomb gas, examining the solutions to the time-dependent Landau-Ginsburg equation near the critical point, establish the free photon field as the continuum limit for a (1) gauge theory with Wilson action, further study the short distance behavior of non-Abelian gauge theories.

		24( 167 ). The principal investigator will study the existence of compact leaves in contact foliations of compact contact manifolds. The existence of these foliations was conjectured by Weinstein. Several special cases have been solved by this investigator and by other mathematicians. Lickorish surgical techniques will be used to investigate the three-dimensional version of the problem. Okumura's theory will be applied to the problem in the case of hypersurfaces with contact types in Kaehler manifolds. Diffeomorphism groups will also be studied. "Manifolds" are generalized surfaces. These may be filled with collections of lower dimensional "leaves." Such collections of leaves are called "foliations." The principal investigator will study leaves which do not wrap on continuously but actually close up. These are called in the literature, "compact leaves." Such are particularly important in applications to other sciences in that they represent, in a general sense, behavior which repeats indefinitely.

		25( 168 ). Research will be conducted on statistical nonparametric estimation problems about survival functions and distribution functions. Minimax estimators will be obtained for a range of loss functions for an unknown survival function in the presence of right-censored data. The loss functions include Cramer-von Mises type loss functions whose weights are Beta densities. The admissibility of the best invariant estimator of a distribution function will be examined under a similar class of loss functions. Corresponding questions will be examined for the case of Kolmogorov-Smirnov loss functions.

		26( 169 ). The principal investigator will continue his important work on the partial differential equations that arise in various areas of continuum mechanics. In particular, he will apply advanced mathematical tools to study the general theory of multiphase thermomechanics as it relates to interfacial dynamics and phenomena involving melting and freezing. He will also investigate some unusual partial differential equations that are found in flows through porous media and in biological dispersal. The work of the principal investigator concerns the development and study of mathematical models that attempt to describe such complicated physical phenomena as the growth of crystals with facets and corners, the evolution of a melting-freezing wave, and more generally the creation of ordered structures in media through the action of curved fronts that move through the media. As an example, think of trying to describe quantitatively what happens if you draw a hot wire through a block of ice. It is a complicated process involving melting and re-freezing, which is difficult to study because the boundary between the melted and unmelted ice is so sensitive to the temperature of the wire and other factors.

		27( 177 ). The principal investigator will study pseudodifferential techniques in the study of degenerate elliptic equations with applications to geometry. He will extend techniques to determine a spectral analysis of the Hodge-Laplace operator acting on differential forms on complete asymptotic hyperbolic manifolds of infinite volume and on geometrically finite quotients of hyperbolic space. Related projects involve the study of the relationship between unique continuation theorems for the Laplacian at infinity and the presence of negative curvature. For many years mathematicians have studied the behavior of certain differential operators on hypersurfaces which extend off to infinity. This study has its origins in the calculus of Newton. In this project the principal investigator will analyze operators which have large variations over very large domains "near" infinity. In the past, only progress on operators which have small local variations was made.

		28( 179 ). Three investigators will study problems in the areas of geometric partial differential equations, mathematical physics, and dynamical systems. One will continue his investigation of geometric aspects of the Atiyah-Singer index theorem and the relationship between quantum field theory and low-dimensional topology. A second will continue an ongoing investigation of the harmonic map equation and its connections with Poisson-Lie structures and quantum groups. She will also investigate the Yang-Mills functional in dimensions larger than four. A third investigator will study the knot types of periodic orbits in the Lorenz attractor. Three investigators will continue ongoing projects involved in differential equations, topology, and mathematical physics. Differential equations relate the rate of change of one or more variables with respect to each other, or with respect to time. Topology is the mathematical study of shape. Both of these areas have a long history of use in mathematical physics.

		29( 189 ). This project describes a basic research program focused on the design and analysis of robust and H- infinity optimal feedback systems. This research program has four major components: multivariable robust stability and stabilization problems, H-infinity optimal control of finite and infinite-dimensional systems, analysis and design of nonlinear time- varying controllers for robust control of linear time- invariant systems, controller design for multiple performance functionals. To account for possible uncertainties in system models, both parametric and unstructured uncertainty in plant models will be considered. Optimal design in the H-infinity norm is considered to provide robustness against uncertainty in the spectra of the exogenous signals or unstructured dynamic modeling uncertainty. It is also a key step in design for robust performance in the presence of unstructured uncertainty. The emphasis is on the development of computationally efficient algorithms for controller design. For this purpose, all high-level algorithms will be developed in terms state-space realizations, real or complex matrix algebraic equations, etc. It is expected that most of the algorithms will be implementable on a variety of computers ranging from engineering workstations to mainframe computers.

		30( 190 ). This research project in theoretical computer science focuses on problems in two interrelated areas: algorithms for graph problems, and the design of data structures. The common theme is the investigation of efficient computation in these areas. The goals are to generate improved techniques, and characterize significant complexity relationships. A central issue will be the efficient coordination of the acquisition of information during a complex computational task.

		31( 191 ). The principal investigator will use his characterization of the Kobayashi metric on smoothly bounded convex domains to study the asymptotic behavior of this metric at a boundary. The ultimate goal is to solidify the relationship between complex function theory on the domain and the geometry of the boundary. In a second project he will study the global properties of contact structures on manifolds of dimension three. Topological invariants of the contact structure will be constructed analytically. Many of the most significant theorems in geometric analysis relate geometric and topological invariants. One of the earliest of these was the relationship between the total Gaussian curvature of a smooth surface and its numbers of tubes and cross caps. In the present project, the principal investigator will relate global Riemannian contact structures to the base topology of the manifold.

		32( 192 ). The two principal investigators will study the isolation of a geometric aspect of integrability, singularity analysis of Toda equations and stratification of Bruhat cells, solutions to the sine-Gordon equations involving constant mean curvature tori immersed in spheres, and the universal enveloping algebra associated with properties of Poisson brackets. This project concerns deep properties of Hamiltonian systems. These are systems of differential equations which describe in particular the motion of mechanical devices. Such devices must conserve both energy and momentum. Recently, various algebraic methods as well as Painleve analysis of integrability has been used to make considerable progress toward the understanding of such systems. This project will contribute to these developments.

		33( 196 ). Block copolymers are of great technological importance and simultaneously provide interesting opportunities to study basic statistical effects in physical science. Although some aspects of the science of these copolymers are reasonably well understood, very little is known about their behavior when dissolved in binary liquid solvents or when they occupy the interface between two immiscible liquids, each of which is a good solvent for one block of the copolymer. A series of experiments will be carried out on diblock and alternating copolymers dissolved in liquid mixtures to determine the effect of the polymer on: 1) the thermodynamics and capillary wave spectrum of the liquid-liquid interface, 2) interfacial development under mechanically driven interfacial instabilities, and 3) composition fluctuations in miscible liquid mixtures. In all three cases, the liquid behavior is expected to affect the polymer conformation at the same time as the polymeric degrees of freedom are affecting the interface(s), and the measurements will be directed toward understanding this behavior.

		34( 197 ). Research on a wide variety of phenomenological and theoretical topics in particle physics will be carried out. Two theoretical projects evaluating the cross-sections fortriple weak gauge boson and S- and P-state (and even D-state)quarkonium production are planned. Several more phenomenological calculations involving psi and chi production invarious collider settings are envisaged. Further work on tests of the hadronic (especially the gluonic) structure functions of the photon in ep collisions will also be undertaken, as will projects at the interface of particle physics with astrophysics and cosmic ray physics. Much of the work to be carried out is meant to further the extremely crucial contact between theoretical and experimental elementary particle physics.

		35( 198 ). The principal investigator will study problems concerning manifolds with positive Ricci curvature, harmonic maps between spheres, and geometry and topology of manifolds with boundary. Obstructions to the existence of metrics on Riemannian manifolds with prescribed curvature conditions will be investigated. Dirac bundles and Dirac operators on manifolds with boundary of dimension 4 and 5 will be analyzed. The mathematical object known as a torus has the shape of an inner tube and is positively curved on the outer parts, while negatively curved around the hole. As a fact, its total curvature is zero. A long time ago mathematicians learned that this meant, with a different concept of distance, the torus can appear flat. The principal investigator will continue his research into analogous problems concerning such prescribed curvature on higher-dimensional manifolds.

		36( 205 ). The principal investigator will study global invariants on strictly pseudoconvex manifolds that arise as renormalized Chern classes for complete Kaehler metrics. He will continue his study of pseudodifferential operator calculi adapted to the study of degenerate operators similiar to the Bergman-Laplace operator. A goal will be to obtain index formulae relating the renormalized Chern numbers to "analytic" indices for degenerate elliptic complexes. And he will continue an investigation of the problem of embedding three dimensional CR-manifolds. For many years mathematicians have studied the behavior of certain differential operators on hypersurfaces which extend off to infinity. This study has its origins in the calculus of Newton. In this project the principal investigator will analyze operators which have large variations over very large domains "near" infinity. In the past, only progress on operators which have small local variations was made.

		37( 208 ). This research project is developing a new technique, based on the detection of interface elastic waves by Brillouin scattering, to measure the bulk elastic constants of solids under hundreds of kilobars of hydrostatic pressure. This unique capability will permit the investigation of the almost universal softening of acoustic phonons with pressure in cubic semiconductors and their potential role in structural phase transitions. Measurements on semiconductor alloys and heterostructures will allow isolation of compositional and interfacial strain effects. Resonant Raman scattering will be employed to study the exchange-mediated phonon renormalization discovered in cobalt-based dilute magnetic semiconductors. Antoher program on II-V semiconductors is attempting to elucidate the fundamental driving mechanism for their novel ordering during epitaxial growth and to explore the possibility to stabilize through strain otherwise unstable crystal lattices.

		38( 209 ). Professor Wogen will investigate several questions in the theory of Hilbert space operators. These questions involve various notions of reflexivity for such operators. In addition the structure of the algebra of all operators which commute with a given operator will be investigated and finally Professor Wogen will examine the structure of certain types of composition operators. Hilbert space operators are essentially infinite matrices of complex numbers. These operators have applications in every area of applied science as well as in pure mathematics. This type of research is an attempt to classify certain important classes of such objects.

		39( 210 ). This investigation, by one of the leaders in the field of cosmo- logical modeling, combines two approaches to the basic problem of understanding the origin of large-scale structure in our uni- verse. The first approach is to work out the consequences of theoretical models using N-body simulations with far greater dynamic range than any previously performed, spanning at least 7.5 orders of magnitude in mass and 3 in distance. With more than 100 times as many particles as nearly all previous cosmolog- ical simulations, this project is expected to yield much improved tests of the inflationary universe paradigm with dark matter and biased galaxy formation. The second approach will investigate the theoretical implications of large-scale deviations from uniform Hubble expansion. A newly developed technique will be applied to galaxy redshift-distance samples to reconstruct the three-dimensional potential, velocity, and mass density fields. Possible systematic errors will be closely investigated with the goal of deriving more accurate relative galaxy distances.

		40( 224 ). The research will be in three area: 1) density functional theory, 2) surface physics, 3) quantum diffusion. The main emphasis in the first area will be density functional theory for high-temperature superconductors. Work in surface physics includes atom-surface scattering, recoilless scattering for very heavy atoms, inelastic scattering involving soft phonon production, and plasmons in small structures. The research in quantum diffusion includes studying hydrogen in or on vibrating solids and the analysis of quantum diffusion in a static disordered potential.

		41( 232 ). Using the method of induced hyperbolicity developed earlier by the principal investigator, families of nonlinear dynamical systems will be studied. Of particular interest will be their stochastic behavior. One-parameter families of diffeomorphisms close to the unstable manifold of the Feigenbaum fixed point will be inspected. And Sullivan's approach will be used to investigate when topological conjugacy implies quasiconformal conjugacy for maps with absolutely continuous invariant measures. An invariant measure of a dynamical system is positive on invariant sets of the system which attract or repel. The principal investigator will study such systems which are close in some parameter space to the Feigenbaum limit. This limit of period-doubling bifurcations has raised intense interest from investigators in a wide variety of physical and biological sciences. Just past this limit lies the onset of chaos.

		42( 235 ). This project will study transport phenomena in symplectic mappings of four or more dimensions. The goal is to partition phase space into regions bounded by partial barriers through which flux occurs. A candidate for such a region is a resonance, defined as a volume in the neighborhood of an elliptic point; its boundary will be obtained from limits of librational periodic orbits. Resonance volumes will be computed and we will determine whether resonances partition phase space. The correlation function for orbits in the neighborhood of a resonance boundary well be studied to determine whether the series for the diffusion tensor converges. Transport will be defined in terms of the flux across resonance boundaries, including branching ratios for transitions from one resonance to a neighboring one, as well as drift along a commensurability channel. To compute the latter a restricted symplectic map will be introduced and studied. Numerical techniques will include frequency filtering and finding periodic orbits.

		43( 239 ). Mathematical research undertaken in this project follows two related themes, both within the context of functions of several complex variables. The first is concerned with the question of removable singularities. There is a significant change in the phenomenon of singularities as soon as one goes from one to several variables. Points or sets where holomorphic functions may be extended as holomorphic functions are called removable singularities. One of the goals of this continuing work is to characterize removable singularities by means of the algebra of functions defined in neighborhoods of the singularities. In examples which have been worked out, when the singular set is convex with respect to the algebra, it is removable. A related question to be taken up concerns the characterization of smooth manifolds in the boundary of a domain which are removable. The second thrust of the project concerns the boundary values of holomorphic functions. Two points of view prevail. One is to determine whether a smooth function on the boundary continues holomorphically to the interior, the other is concerned with the question of the extent to which a holomorphic function on the interior extends to the boundary in some reasonable fashion. In the former case, work will concentrate on efforts to determine whether functions which can be continued holomorphically along lower dimensional manifolds, complex lines for example, are holomorphic in the large. Boundary considerations lead naturally to applications of geometric analysis, while the extension theory is closely tied with that of solving systems of partial differential equations.

		44( 240 ). The principal investigator will complete the study of two- generator subgroups of PSL(2,R). The investigation will result in a complete and unified account of the geometric and algebraic approaches to this classification problem, as well as a complete description of the relationship between this algebra and geometry. The investigator will also study an extension of these methods to the complex numbers and to several real variables. The work to be completed by the principal investigator has as one of its ramifications the complete understanding of tilings of the plane by tiles invariant under some sort of discrete group action. These have been of interest to mathematicians for more than a century and their study was recently revived by W. Thurston. Connections between this investigation and the topology of three dimensional hypersurfaces as well as to dynamical systems, abound.

		45( 242 ). The goal of this research is to understand the behavior of solutions of nonlinear partial differential equations by using asymptotic methods of singular perturbation type. Two kinds of problems will be investigated: the slow crossing of a separatrix due to a weak dissipative perturbation and the development of a method of averaging for slowly varying waves influenced by weak perturbations. Such equations arise in a host of areas where the behavior of nonlinear waves is the primary physical process. Many phenomena in nature involve the action of weakly nonlinear waves. Examples include the motion of the tides as well as the daily bodily rhythms of waking and sleeping. Such complex systems can be approximated sometimes by systems of partial differential equations that contain one or more small parameters. In this research the principal investigator will use the smallness of these parameters to construct approximate solutions of the equations by replacing the complicated equations with simpler ones. The simpler equations still retain the essential physics of the complicated ones, but they are much easier to study.

		46( 243 ). With this proposal the principal investigator will continue his analytical and numerical studies of discontinuous solutions of mathematical models of viscous, compressible flows in two and three space dimensions. In particular, he will investigate the well-posedness of the boundary value problems for the systems of nonlinear hyperbolic equations resulting from the models, and he will design improved numerical schemes for resolving the discontinuities present in the solutions. Very often mathematicians and fluid dynamicists study one- dimensional models of complicated flow phenomena in order to gain insights into the behavior of real flows in two and three space dimensions. In the present grant the principal investigator will extend some of his results for one-dimensional models of the gasdynamic equations to more realistic models in higher dimensions. Problems in more than one dimension are difficult, and so the investigator will employ a combined analytical- numerical approach to study discontinuous solutions called "shocks".

		47( 247 ). Dr. Beers will complete an objective prism survey of the northern and southern hemispheres of our Galaxy and then follow up on selected stars which have extremely low metal abundances and stars on the horizontal branch of their evolutionary track. The final database of candidates should include about 16,000 stars with relatively low abundances of iron, and about 25,000 horizontal branch stars will be identified. The halo of our Galaxy contains less than 1 percent of the luminous stars in the entire Galaxy. Yet the halo is fundamental for revealing crucial issues of stellar evolution, the processes of galaxy formation and evolution, and for constraining the distribution of matter throughout the Galaxy. To understand the halo, one must first find it and characterize it. Ideally, complete spectroscopic and photometric information for the approximately one billion luminous stars which populate the halo would allow the observer to draw a picture of the halo which is untainted by sampling bias. Short of this, one can only attempt to minimize the effects of any selection criteria which must be imposed to make the problem tractable. In its broadest sense, the purpose of Dr. Beers' survey is to discover the objects which will, eventually, allow for a much more complete understanding of the halo of our Galaxy.

		48( 248 ). This is a cooperative research project between the University of Missouri (UMR) and the National Cheng-Kung University (NCKU) in Taiwan, to study the seismic behavior and design of reinforced concrete low-rise shear walls and building systems with openings. NCKU will perform experimental and UMR will conduct analytical studies. The objectives are: 1) mathematical formulation of load- deflection of walls with coupling deformations of bending, shear, axial,and bond slip, 2) evaluation of stiffness reduction of walls and structural systems after cracks, 3) development of hysteresis models for bendings, shear and axial, based on coupling behavior, 4) evaluation of damping coefficients at various deformation stages, 5) statistical studies of design parameters of reduction factor, ductility and damage index, 6) correlation of the analytical and experimental results. Recommendations for building code revisions/improvements will be made for engineering practice.

		49( 251 ). A key consideration in a variety of manufacturing processes is controlling either the position or shape of an interface defined as the boundary between liquid and solid materials of dissimilar composition or density to within certain allowable tolerances. Automating these processes requires the ability to monitor and maintain the critical growth interface parameters throughout an entire lengthy batch process using an appropriate process feedback control algorithm. A method will be developed to monitor and subsequently control an interface boundary using an appropriate gamma ray emitting radioisotope and a rugged semiconductor detector. Initial results obtained during the Phase I program indicated that this technique is effective. Further research on this method should lead to a commercially viable control system.

		50( 256 ). This research in theoretical nuclear physics will obtain an accurate assessment of the nuclear spectral function in terms of the nucleons structure function. Recent lepton- nucleus scattering data will be analyzed to set limits on the magnitude of pure quark effects inside the nuclear medium.

		51( 265 ). Professor Beer has been involved in the study of topologies on the closed convex subsets of a normed linear space. Such topologies give rise to topologies on convex functions, with a function identified with its epigraph, the set of points on or above its graph. In the last two years, Professor Beer introduced a topology compatible with Mosco convergence of sequences of convex sets, showing that it is stable with respect to duality if and only if the underlying space is reflexive. Several characterizations of the topology were obtained, and continuity properties of a variety of operators and functionals on convex sets were studied. In response to the unsuitability of this Mosco topology in the nonreflexive case, and in view of some prior promising results regarding the norm convergence of linear functionals and their level sets, Professor Beer studied the topology of uniform convergence of distance functionals on bounded sets. Not only is this topology stable with respect to duality without restriction, but it is also the right convergence notion in terms of the stability of solutions of convex optimization problems. Professor Beer will continue his studies on convergence of convex sets, with particular attention to connections with Banach space geometry, approximation of multifunctions, and specific operations and functionals. He also hopes to become involved in applications of set convergence in evolving research in the foundations of nonsmooth analysis, e.g., to certain optimization problems.

		52( 268 ). This study examines the following problems, (1) cumulus- stratocumulus transition in the oceanic boundary layer for FIRE and ASTEX, (2) land surface interaction for FIFE, and (3) radiative-convective coupling in the boundary layer. This study is important because it will help us to improve our conceptual framework for future experiments such as TOGA/COARE; and to develop better parametric models for the convective boundary layer in climate and forecast models.

		53( 275 ). Professor Montgomery-Smith will conduct research into the study of the cotype 2 constant of operators from C(K) to any Banach space. This is intended to fill a gap on what is already known about how cotype 2 relates to operators from C(K) which has so far dealt only with operators which factor through a space of cotype 2. This research will involve the study of Rademacher processes. This is a recent but very natural area. It takes as its starting point the well studied Gaussian processes. This research is at the interface of two fields: probability and operator theory on infinite dimensional spaces. Properties of operators (infinite dimensional matrices) are studied using ideas from probability and conversely the quest to understand these operators leads to new and interesting questions in pure probability.

		54( 277 ). Professor Buechler's research in mathematical logic is in stability theory, a subfield of model theory. In recent years several general model-theoretic problems have been systematically approached via the stability hierarchy. Even though the problem itself may not involve stability-theoretic notions, considering separately the cases: omega-stable, superstable, etc., brings into play a mass of technical machinery. Such is the case for Vaught's conjecture, which was proved by Shelah for omega-stable theories. The next step is to consider all superstable theories, but this has proved too difficult for the methods used in the omega-stable case. What is required is an analysis which is sensitive to the way in which, e.g., sets of rank alpha are pieced together to form sets of rank alpha plus one. Buechler will continue with this geometrical approach to the problem, which has already yielded significant results.

		55( 282 ). Various topics in mathematical analysis associated with orthogonal polynomials will be taken up in this project. On the same interval, there are many classes of orthogonal polynomials. In each class, orthogonality is defined with respect to a measure (density) concentrated on the interval. The main theme of this work is a continuing effort to understand the relationship between the measure and the recurrence coefficients of the corresponding polynomials. Associated to each class of orthogonal polynomials is a unique algorithm which produces the higher order polynomials in terms of the lower. This recurrence is a simple linear relation, and it is the coefficients in the relation that are of considerable interest. Methods to be employed include minimizing polynomial integrals (the Christoffel function), asymptotic behavior of difference equations and eigenvalues of infinite tridiagonal matrices. The methods used for studying eigenvalues of matrices can be adapted to the study of solutions of the Schrodinger equation in a central field of force, and the Christoffel function is related to statistical prediction theory. Results of polynomial approximation, a natural by-product of this work, and prediction theory are valuable in digital processing of electronic signals.

		56( 286 ). The principal investigator is currently addressing two areas of research. The first is the application of Casson-Gordon type invariants to problems in link concordance, and, in particular, to questions relating to boundary linking. A second area of research is the study of periodic knots and symmetries of manifolds. Both areas require the development of algebraic tools for describing knots and links and for distinguishing truly distinct knots and links from ones which are merely differently presented. Application of such tools to classify knots and links to within some natural equivalence is a major goal.

		57( 297 ). This project will make theoretical and numerical investigations of the nonlinear partial differential equations that describe structured models of cell population dynamics. Individual cells are distinguished by structure variables corresponding to size, age, or other physical characteristics. The populations are divided into population subclasses that interact through nonlinear transition rates. The main objective will be to understand the qualitative behavior of the populations, the on- set of oscillatory phenomena, and the response to external periodic loss functions. The main methods will apply the theory of semigroups of positive linear and nonlinear operators in Banach lattices. The main applications will be to tumor cell populations with proliferating and quiescent classes and to multi-level blood cell production systems. The goal in the tumor cell population studies will be to understand the role of quiescence in tumor growth and tumor therapy. The goal in the blood cell population studies will be to understand the regulation processes in normal and abnormal systems.

		58( 301 ). Work to be done on this project falls into two related classes. The first, infinite dimensional nonlinear programming problems, concerns the modeling of optimal control problems for partial differential equations, functional differential equations and other equations as infinite dimensional nonlinear programming problems. Goals include developing necessary conditions for the existence of minima and for the convergence of sequences of suboptimal elements. The second theme, optimal control theory of partial differential and functional differential equations concerns application of results from the first part to problems such as optimal deformation problems - especially in the presence of obstacles. The results are likely to include versions of Pontryagin's maximum principle, constancy and vanishing of the Hamiltonian and convergence estimates. Attention will also be given to boundary control questions, where results (compared to distributed parameter systems) are sparse. Application to specific equations will be made.

		59( 303 ). Professor Johnson will study linear differential operators with bounded but non-decaying coefficients (which might be almost periodic or paths of an ergodic process). Using techniques from dynamical systems theory, he will study spectral properties and generalized Floquet exponents for such operators. He will apply his results in the following areas: bifurcation from invariant tori in non-linear dynamical systems; spectral properties of the one-dimensional almost periodic Schroedinger operator; linear optimal control theory; the topological index theory of non- periodic ordinary and partial differential equations, and its relation with cohomology theory of certain C* algebras; the Korteweg-deVries equation with bounded initial data. Johnson's research in differential equations is very broadly based and has implications for a variety of fields ranging from pure mathematics to physics and engineering.

		60( 310 ). This research program is to learn about the behavior of liquid mixtures near solid boundaries. The work is primarily experimental. The fundamental issues are the nature of the boundary states, including their microscopic structure; the role and origins of short and long range substrate-liquid interactions; the importance of thermal fluctuations; and the response to thermodynamic forces both in and out of equilibrium. There are three main projects: First, a capillary rise exploration of the transitions between states of wetting at bulk coexistence. The variables here are temperature and the chemistry of the bulk liquids and the substrates. Second, optical studies of the polarization and intensity of reflected light from liquid-solid interfaces as a means of uncovering microscopic features of equilibrium wetting layer structure. Third, the exploration of the nonequilibrium response of wetting structures to temperature changes with time and fluid motion. The aim here is to learn about otherwise inaccessible regimes of equilibrium response as well as time-dependent phenomena. As a supplementary project, they will join with the research group of Benjamin Widom to study the interfacial structure and energy of phase-separated polymer solutions through reflectivity and capillary rise experiments.

		61( 316 ). Professor Gordon will continue to investigate problems in the topology of low-dimensional manifolds, especially those related to knot theory. A particular topic that will receive attention is Dehn surgery on knots and links, a construction that is relevant to many fundamental questions concerning the structure of 3-dimensional manifolds. The structure of three-dimensional manifolds, very natural geometric objects of the same dimension as the space in which we live, remains an important and surprisingly mysterious subject for mathematical investigation.

		62( 317 ). The principal investigator works in the area of infinite particle systems. Interacting particle systems are stochastic models for large systems of interacting components, and can be used to model the spread of disease through a population or the consensus of voters in a population. One topic the investigator will study concerns the nonlinear voter models. This class of models contains the "voter model", and initial indications (computer simulations) indicate that these models behave differently from the voter model.

		63( 318 ). Five investigators will study related problems involving various aspects of differential geometry, algebraic varieties, and dynamical systems. The first will study variational problems arising from curvature considerations. The second will study isospectral deformations, optimal structures on Riemannian manifolds, and fibrations of spheres by great spheres. The third will investigate Einstein metrics, isotropic irreducible Riemannian manifolds, and the isotropy representation of symmetric spaces. A topologist will study stratified spaces, particularly algebraic varieties. And the fifth will study hyperbolic geometry in higher dimensions, representations of braid groups, link groups, and invariant links. A central goal of the differential geometers working on this project is to understand spacial curvature. In particular they will study the relationship between curvature and the overall shape of the space, or what sorts of functions may exist on the space. The topologist and dynamical systems theorist will use their understanding of the shape of the space and allowable dynamical properties to restrict curvature in various ways.

		64( 329 ). Five investigators will study problems in contemporary differential geometry which have close relations to nonlinear and linear partial differential equations. Among the areas of special emphasis are the geometry of submanifolds, symplectic and Poisson geometry, Gauge theory in principal bundles, Lie transformation groups, and complex manifolds. Differential geometry is an outgrowth of multi-variable calculus. Physics has been a rich source of unsolved problems which may be phrased naturally in differential geometric terms. Among these are questions arising from the geometry of space and time first understood by Einstein. Gauge theory is an attempt to go beyond these earlier studies toward a theory which explains both the physics of the small and of the large. This group of differential geometers will study a variety of problems related to modern gauge theory.

		65( 338 ). Professor Fialkow will study several questions in multivariable operator theory concerning the structure of bounded linear operators in Hilbert space and the structure of certain associated C* algebras. One aspect of the research concerns the solution of systems of linear equations in C* algebras. Another facet involves polynomially bounded hyponormal weighted shifts. A final topic is the study of structural and spectral invariants for quasisimilarity of operators. The latter research is particularly concerned with characterizing those operators quasisimilar to the unilateral shift and determining their spectral properties. Hilbert space operators are essentially infinite matrices of complex numbers. These operators have applications in every area of applied science as well as in pure mathematics. This type of research is an attempt to classify certain important categories of such objects.

		66( 346 ). Theoretical and numerical studies will be initiated for an array of problems in gravitational physics and relativistic astrophysics. Topics of interest include (1) development of techniques in numerical relativity and their application in modeling sources of gravitational radiation and in exploring nonlinear, dynamical spacetimes; (2) numerical modeling of the tidal disruption of stars during close encounters with massive black holes and the possible relevance of disruption for feeding active galactic nuclei; (3) the calculation of magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) winds from accretion disks and stars and the development of a general relativistic MHD numerical scheme; and (4) a study of the recently discovered eclipsing millisecond pulsar 1957+20. The goal of this work is to acquire a deeper understanding of self-gravitating and dynamical systems and of high energy (relativistic) phenomena. Many of these physical studies rely upon the use of large-scale numerical modeling techniques. Accordingly, useful byproducts of such studies are almost invariably new and refined numerical algorithms. The project relating to the eclipsing pulsar 1957+20 is of a more phenomenological nature and relies upon the close interplay between theoretical calculation and observational evidence.

		67( 349 ). The principle investigator will study the inverse scattering problem by using two mathematical methods called the Wiener-Hopf factorization of operators and the generalized Muskhelishvili-Vekua method. Besides being powerful tools to solve an important problem in physics, the methods of this proposal will also contribute to various pure and applied areas of mathematics such as operator theory, functional analysis, partial differential equations, integral equations, and complex analysis.

		68( 350 ). Structure and dynamics of polymer-based glasses are studied below the glass-transition temperature with a combination of spectroscopy, theory, and polymer science. This approach operates at the interface of physical chemistry and material science to utilize molecular information to account for observed bulk properties. Nuclear magnetic resonance, the tool utilized in this investigation, probes structure and motion at the level of chemical groups which is then related to the macroscopic or bulk material properties of the multicomponent glasses. Local intermolecular structure in these amorphous materials is determined by carbon-13 spin diffusion experiments, while molecular reorientation is monitored with spin relaxation and line shape experiments. Rapid development of NMR experiments and instrumentation continues to offer new avenues for the study of solids which will provide a level of insight not attainable a few years ago. Quantitative interpretational models are developed which link the spectroscopic data to mechanical and thermal response as well as such technologically relevant materials behaviour as plasticization and permeability. The particular multicomponent glasses, polycarbonates and their mixtures, are selected for study as the result of their interesting and important materials properties. The interpretational efforts are also tied to the development of theory. The use of lattice models to interpret polymer-diluent structure and dynamics as well as mobilityof sorbed gas is a case in point. Simulation and modeling are used to assist in the development of physically sensible interpretational models.

		69( 352 ). This is a proposal to study mathematical models of physical phenomena arising in the flow of compressible and turbulent gases. In particular, the principal investigator will use analytical and numerical tools to investigate the instability of solutions of nonlinear systems of hyperbolic equations in three dimensions, the evolution of vortex filaments, the derivation of macroscopic transport quantities from turbulent flows using techniques of homogenization theory, and the properties of weak solutions of systems of equations from fluid dynamics and plasma physics. Various types of physical phenomena involve flows containing vortices. Everyday examples of vortices are tornadoes or the bath water as it goes down the drain. Mathematicians study the properties of such vortex motions by constructing simplified sets of equations that have "vortex-like" solutions and then using analytical and numerical methods to predict how these solutions evolve in time. The principal investigator will examine models of vortex flows that arise in aerodynamics and plasma physics.


	Top Words:
		1. OPERATORS
		2. EQUATIONS
		3. DIFFERENTIAL
		4. INVESTIGATOR
		5. BOUNDARY


Cluster 12

	Documents:
		1( 31 ). The International Union for Pure and Applied Biophysics will hold its 10th International Biophysics Congress and General Assembly in Vancouver, Canada, July 29 to August 3, 1990. The meeting offers a broad program of symposia on topics of current biophysical interest such as: 1) membrane organization and function; 2) macromolecular structure function recognition; 3) biophysical techniques; and 4) cell and bioenergetics. Scientists of international reputation have been selected to serve as invited participants. In addition, poster sessions will provide for the latest research results to be discussed in detail. This meeting provides the opportunity for U.S. scientists to meet outstanding foreign scientists, to present their work to an international audience and to, perhaps, begin important international collaborations.

		2( 41 ). This project submitted by the American Society of Human Genetics, provides partial support for the scientific program of the 8th International Congress of Human Genetics to be held in Washington, DC, October 6-11, 1991. These Congresses, convened every five years since 1956, provide an excellent forum for the presentation of fundamental research results in human genetics to the international community of scholars in this rapidly advancing field. The primary purpose of the Congress is to enhance the body of knowledge in human genetics through the exchange of information that will take place. This Congress comes at a most propitious time when important advances in basic molecular genetics are being incorporated into the practice of human genetics. The obvious potential generated by such powerful analytical techniques as those employing recombinant DNA, DNA- and chromosome-mediated gene transfer, flow cytometry, polymerase chain reaction, and homologous recombination indicate this to be a particularly opportune time for such as international meeting. It should be noted that the extensive international collaboration in human genetics which presently exists will continue to develop as dictated by complementary expertise in different areas for the most economical and efficient use of limited scientific resources.

		3( 45 ). Description: This project provides support for twelve U.S. scientists to participate in the International Conference on Quantum Optics, to be held in Hyderabad, India January 5-9, 1991. The conference's aims include interaction between scientists from India, neighboring countries, Europe and the U.S., and encouragement of cooperative research. The program covers recent development in: squeezed states and nonclassical light; quantum theory of measurement and interferometers; cavity QED; photon statistics and optical phenomena; optical phenomena in superintense fields; topological places in nonlinear and quantum phenomena; coherence theory; laser cooling and trapping of ions and neutral atoms; new mechanism of laser action; resonance fluorescence; quantum jumps, optical bistability; and light induced drift. The Indian convener is Dr. G.S. Agarwal of the School of Physics, University of Hyderabad who is an active scientist in the field with a long record of successful collaborative research with U.S. scientists. The invited U.S. participants are eminently qualified and active scientists who can benefit from and contribute to the conference. Scope: This activity is beneficial to the Indian and U.S. scientists by enabling them to interact with colleagues from Europe and India, as well as develop cooperative activities between scientists of the two countries. It is likely the maximum benefits will be for scientists from smaller Indian universities who have few chances for such interaction.

		4( 47 ). The grant provides partial funding for the Sixth International Conference on Molecular Beam Epitaxy, being held on the campus of the University of California, San Diego, August 26-31, 1990. The scope of the conference covers the entire spectrum of molecular beam epitaxy, for example, growth of materials, processing and characterization, growth physics, device physics, and properties and structure of thin films. The funds will be used to provide partial support for participation by graduate students and young scientists. The proceedings of the conference will be published in the Journal of Crystal Growth.

		5( 65 ). To facilitate the exchange of ideas among workers interested in computer applications in biology, an international meeting will be held from 8-11 July 1990, at George Mason University. The meeting will involve computer workshops, poster sessions, and plenary sessions with invited talks. The plenary sessions will treat the following specific areas: - The BioMATRIX Concept - Phylogeny and Systematics - Enabling Technologies for BioInformatics - Artificial Intelligence and Philosophical Foundations - Directories and Data Integration Projects - BioMATRIX of the Biosequences - Modeling and Simulation - Electronic Facilities for Scientific Communication The meeting will also involve organizational sessions that will, among other things, explore the formation of a BioMATRIX society to provide a vehicle for further scientific exchange.

		6( 100 ). This award will support the activities of the American Council on Tall Buildings and Urban Habitat Headquartered at Lehigh University. The organization is cooperating with a counterpart organization in Hong Kong to sponsor the Fourth World Congress on Tall Buildings - 2000 and Beyond.

		7( 101 ). The Fourteenth Symposium on Real Analysis will be held from June 20 to June 23, 1990 at California State University, San Bernardino. This is the fourteenth in a series of symposia that have provided real analysts from North America, Europe, Africa, Australia, and Asia the opportunity to meet, to hear, and to discuss mathematics. A list of the invited speakers will include Jack Brown, Andrew Bruckner, Jack Ceder, Alexander Kechris, and David Preiss. Written versions of all the presentations will appear in the Conference Proceedings Section of the following volume of the Real Analysis Exchange.

		8( 110 ). The problems of human resource development are of high priority at this time for Engineering. Efforts to encourage women, minorities and the handicapped to choose careers in engineering are needed. This grant is to provide funds for a reception for women in chemical engineering to be held at the 1989 annual American Institute of Chemical Engineers meeting in San Francisco, CA. The purpose is to give women a chance to meet and discuss issues of common concern. The reception is open to all who are attending the meeting. A product of the meeting is a list of all female faculty members in the US, a list that is circulated and should help open lines of communication.

		9( 112 ). This application is for partial funding of a conference on Chromosome Replication and Segregation in Yeast to be held under the auspices of the Federation of American Societies of Experimental Biology (FASEB) from August 5-10, 1990 at the Vermont Academy, Saxton's River, Vermont. Participation in the meeting will be limited to 155 scientists who will be chosen from applicants on the basis of their expertise and interests as being the most likely to help create a stimulating and informative meeting. The topic of the meeting emphasizes research on the chromosome replication and segregation in yeast. While most participants will use baker's yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, as an experimental system, scientists using other filamentous fungi will be encouraged to participate. The conference will consist of nine scientific sessions, each with approximately 9 speakers; in addition, one or two afternoons will be devoted to poster sessions and/ or informal group discussions. Approximately half of the speakers from each session will be invited in advanced; the remaining half will be chosen from the pool of applicants. Three sessions will be devoted to DNA replication (cis elements and their associated factors, enzymology, and in vivo analysis of origin usage). Four sessions will be devoted to chromosome segregation (centromeres and their associated factors, the mitotic apparatus, nuclear architecture and new mutational approaches to chromosome transmission). The last two sessions will be devoted to the analysis of the coordination of chromosome replication and segregation during the cell cycle. This meeting will fill an important niche for scientists interested in yeast chromosome replication and segregation by allowing extensive communication between laboratories at the important time this rapidly developing field.

		10( 115 ). This project will partially support the travel of a small group of U.S. scientists to the 22nd International Congress of Applied Psychology - Kyoto, Japan, July 22-27, 1990. The International Association of Applied Psychology is the largest international organization of individual psychologists with over 3000 members (one-third from the U.S.) in nine substantive divisions. This meeting is being co-sponsored by the Japanese Psychological Association and the Science Council of Japan and will include over 100 symposia on a wide variety of scientific topics.

		11( 126 ). This grant will partially, support a FASEB Summer Research Conference on Cellular and Molecular Genetics to be held at Copper Mountain, Colorado from August 12-17, 1990. The major goal of this conference is to bring together an eminent group of cellular biologists, molecular biologists, neurobiologists, biochemists and geneticists to discuss multidisciplinary approaches to topics which are at the forefront of contemporary biology. The Conference is deliberately meant to encompass broader areas so that participants in diverse fields, but with common scientific goals, have an opportunity to interact. There are nine sessions spread over five days. There will be a session in the morning and evening and the afternoons would be used either to discuss new technologies or for poster presentations. The topics deal with: DNA replication, developmental biology of lower and higher eukaryotes, systems which allow understanding of cellular differentiation, regulation of transcription, oncogenesis, RNA processing, the cell cycle regulation, molecular neurobiology and human genetics. Additionally, there will be sessions dealing with techniques to generate transgenic mice, homologous recombination and physical manipulation of large genomes. In each scheduled session, the chairperson has carefully selected three or four principal speakers to introduce the general subject. The applicants are to include an abstract along with the application. The number of participants is not to exceed 150. There is extensive opportunity for discussion which will facilitate communication to promote scientific cooperation and collaboration among the participants.*** //

		12( 129 ). This award supports the Seventh International Conference on Machine Learning. This meeting will fostyer communication among researchers in this rapidly growing area. The conference will be hosted by the University of Texas at Austin and will be held from June 21 through June 23, 1990. The meeting will contribute significantly to progress in this important area.

		13( 156 ). This award will help fund a conference in singularity theory. This conference will be held from August 6 to 10, 1990 on the campus of the University of Hawaii, Manoa. This conference will be concerned with all branches of singularity theory, but with emphasis on the following: (1) singularities of mappings (real or complex), (2) singularities of real varieties, (3) foundational properties: differential analysis, subanalytic sets, etc., and (4) applications, e.g., to differential geometry.

		14( 175 ). This award supports an international workshop on applied mechanics to be held in Valparaiso, Chile from January 2-5, 1991. The U.S. organizer is Dean Mook of Virginia Polytechnic Institute; his counterpart in Chile is Pablo Kittl of the University of Chile in Santiago. The interaction organizing and editorial committee consists of engineers from Brazil, Canada, Argentina, Venezuela and Chile as well as from the u.S. The objectives of the workshop are 1) to expose engineers and scientists as well as graduate students to new research findings, techniques and problems and 2) to provide opportunities for personal interactions among the mechanical from all the Americans through formal lectures and informal conversations. There will be a special session with a panel of well-known engineers from both Americans to discuss how to further open channels of communication and to foster future collaboration between North and South America. In addition there were 45 abstracts received in Chile. Such a level of interest on both sides makes this opportunity for interaction between U.S. and Latin American engineers and scientists along with the attendance of graduate students a good example of the fulfillment of the goals of the Science in Developing Countries program.

		15( 264 ). Data on natural populations and biological field station's habitat are a valuable resource, if properly managed and cared for. Successful data management requires field stations to take advantage of advances in technology, and to support staff at field stations. This project will support a workshop to be held April 22-26, 1990, at the Kellogg Biological Station, as a sucessor to a similar workshop held in 1982. The purpose will be to assess the progress that has been made since the earlier workshop, to share and disseminate information, to recommend standards and protocols to aid collaborative research and to propose new directions for which pilot programs might lead the way. The workshop will be co-sponsored by the Organization of Biological Field Stations (OBFS) and the Southern Association of Marine Labs (SAML), and will represent the diversity of sites and the various stages of development of data management systems in these two groups. Approximately 40 representatives from field station and marine laboratories will be invited to participate in one of three working groups: 1) Data Administration, 2)Database Standards to Facilitate Collaborative Research, and 3)Computers and Software for Data Management. A report of the workshops conclusions and recommendation will be made to the National Science Foundation, and distributed to the institutions constitution OBFS and SAML, as well as to other interested scientists.

		16( 324 ). This award from the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program will enable twenty U.S. graduate students to attend the XIV International Conference on Organometallic Chemistry in Detroit, Michigan, August 19-24, 1990. The conference is expected to attract more than 500 scientists with demonstrated research interests in organometallic chemistry and particularly its applications in new materials. The primary goals of the 1990 meeeting are to provide opportunities for full participation both to young researchers in the United States and to scientists from less-developed nations, to stimulate interaction between academic and industrial chemists in the U.S., and to provide a forum for the latest developments in the broad field of organometallic chemistry.

		17( 327 ). Dr. Gerald O. Platau has been awarded a grant from The Special Projects Office of The Chemistry Division with additional support from The Division of Materials Research, The Division of Information, Robotics and Intelligent Systems, and The Division of Instrumentation and Resources to help defray expenses associated with hosting the 12th International CODATA Conference. The conference will be held in Columbus Ohio on July 15-19, 1990. The theme of the conference is "Data for Discovery", and it will provide a framework for discussion by international experts on the following major areas: 1) Prediction of Global Change; 2) Spatial Databases; 3) Materials Properties Data Systems; 4) Expert Systems and Other Knowledge Tools; 5) Trends in Integration of Information Across Biology; and 6) Impact of New Technology on Data Handling. The NSF contribution to the overall funding of this meeting will help to provide travel and subsistence expenses for several of the invited speakers.

		18( 330 ). The purpose of this workshop is to provide an assessment of current research in the People's Republic of China in the areas of computer-aided design and manufacturing (CAD/CAM), production engineering, precision engineering, and production systems and process planning. It will also afford the opportunity for interaction between Chinese and United States researchers on these subjects. Through this interaction, the workshop will calibrate the research of our Chinese counterparts against that of the United States research community. To accomplish this a select group of Chinese researchers in the above-mentioned fields will be invited to the United States to attend the National Science Foundation-sponsored Conference on Production Research and Technology-Advances in Manufacturing Systems Integration and Processes, to be held January 8-12, 1990 at Arizona State University in Tempe, AZ. After the meeting, visits would be arranged for the Chinese researchers to National Science Foundation-funded Engineering Research Centers in these fields as well as to other University and industry research laboratories conducting similar work. At the end of the workshop activity, the attendees of the workshop will be asked to submit a report detailing their observations and findings, summarizing their own work, and comparing it to similar work they saw in the United States.

		19( 357 ). Until relatively recently, there has been little research on gender differences in the social organization and social contexts of crime and on issues of gender and gender bias in social control, penal practice, and the administration of justice. Scholarship in this area is growing rapidly and is recognized by many as making some of the most significant advances in contemporary criminological research. The theoretical and policy contributions of the research are of global importance. However, researchers working in this area remain isolated and there has been little international communication or coordination. This award is for an international scientific conference of scholars from different countries to discuss gender issues in crime, law, and social control. The conference participants will critically examine theory, methods, and empirical data in an effort to disentangle gender assumptions and biases, gender differences, and what is known about the role of women in different systems of law and social control. Further, and equally as important, the conference seeks to examine the implications for future research and theory in criminology of bringing gender perspectives to bear and doing so in an international, non-ethnocentric way. Approximately thirty participants from 18 countries will attend the conference to be held in Montreal, Canada in July 1991. An edited volume of papers, together with relevant summaries of conference discussions, will be produced. This conference will provide a unique opportunity to pool findings and interpretations, from an international perspective, on concepts of gender in the field of criminology. The products of this conference should have a major effect on the development of scientific research by broadening the conceptual base of what and how the field studies social control, deviance, and crime.

		20( 366 ). This is a project to support attendance by approximately twenty five graduate students at the Fifth Distributed Memory Computing Conference in Charleston, South Carolina on April 9.12, 1990. Priority is given to students presenting papers in the student paper competition and to women and minority students. The conference provides a forum for researchers in the field of distributed memory computing to present results and exchange ideas and information. It is a continuation of the Hypercube Concurrent Computers and Applications conference series.//


	Top Words:
		1. CONFERENCE
		2. INTERNATIONAL
		3. MEETING
		4. SCIENTISTS
		5. HELD


Cluster 13

	Documents:
		1( 1 ). Research in Plio-Pleistocene hominid paleontology over the past four decades has focused largely on exploration and recovery of fossils and artifacts from sites in East Africa. All five known australopithecine sites in southern Africa were discovered between 1924 and 1948; no new locality has been found in over forty years. In order to appreciate the course of early hominid development beyond that represented in East Africa, and in order to gain a more precise picture of chronological relationships, it is critical that additional fossiliferous localities be discovered in southern Africa. Plio-Pleistocene sediments in southern Africa are represented by breccia-filled caves within the limestones of the Transvaal System. The purpose of this project is to undertake a systematic, exploratory survey of the outcrops along the eastern escarpment of the Transvaal System for fossiliferous breccia caves, and to identify sites for future, long-term excavation. The chances of finding such a rewarding site may not be high, but the extreme value to anthropology if such a site is found makes this exploration a most worthwhile risk.


	Top Words:
		1. AFRICA
		2. SOUTHERN
		3. PLIO
		4. HOMINID
		5. FOSSILIFEROUS


Cluster 14

	Documents:
		1( 203 ). Research will be conducted to produce a coherent system for the robust analysis of designed experiments. Hypothesis tests and confidence intervals as well as estimators will be studied. Mixed effects and random effects models are to be studied as well as fixed effects models. Specifically, a new analysis of variance table with three additional "mean squares" per line will be given based on high-breakdown, high-efficientcy estimates of effects and of scale. The new mean squares will provide information on unusual aspects of the data. Also the robust scale problem will be studied and robust methods for variance components will be given. Tests for significant effects in two to the power k designs without replication will be given. Proposed interactive dynamic graphics for designed experiments will be evaluated.

		2( 225 ). This dissertation will research state effects on union demands and the climate of nonparticipation in Britain, France, and Germany between 1871 and 1975. The student will collect and quantify qualitative data on state strategies and union power. The longitudinal data analysis will employ interrupted time- series and two-stage least squares models.


	Top Words:
		1. SQUARES
		2. EFFECTS
		3. UNION
		4. ROBUST
		5. VARIANCE


Cluster 15

	Documents:
		1( 260 ). This project adds insight, design techniques, and analysis tools to the area of massively parallel VLSI computation for special-purpose search processor. Analyses for the speedups offered by associative memories are carried through appropriate modeling of the delays associated with instruction and data broadcasting and the realization of global reduction operations on response tags. Pipelined systolic associative memory organizations are developed so that they are truly scalable (up to sizes required for realistic applications in the foreseeable future) within the potentials and constraints of the VLSI technology and to evaluate their cost- effectiveness. Tree-based, hypercube-based, and mesh-based VLSI search processors having sublinear number of processors (with respect to the number of keys or records) are examined and various design alternatives, optimality issues, and realization tradeoffs are analyzed .


	Top Words:
		1. VLSI
		2. REALIZATION
		3. PROCESSORS
		4. ASSOCIATIVE
		5. SEARCH


Cluster 16

	Documents:
		1( 24 ). Recent attention focused on the accelerating pace of human-induced environmental change obscures the fact that people have had profound impacts on natural systems for millennia. In the Western Hemisphere, significant changes occurred in the wake of European settlement over the last 500 years. Within central Mexico, the introduction of Spanish agricultural practices resulted in significant changes in the form and intensity of land uses. This doctoral dissertation project will examine how such changes have been recorded in the sediments of the upper Rio Laja valley. Radiocarbon dating will be used to establish an alluvial chronology of the upper Rio Laja valley; a hydrologic comparison of modern and pre-colonial rivers will be based on standard paleohydrologic techniques; rates of soil erosion will be measured in two tributary channels; and historic evidence of erosion in upland regions will be evaluated. This project will provide valuable information about the historic evolution of land-use patterns and related changes in river valley deposits. Although focusing on a specific locale in central Mexico, the study will yield broader insights into the complex ways in which human and natural systems have interacted over the last four centuries. The project also will provide an excellent opportunity for a promising young scholar to continue to develop independent research skills.

		2( 74 ). Recent studies have been undertaken at sites scattered throughout the world to analyze pollen and sediments in cores from bogs, lakes, and other appropriate settings. These analyses have shed considerable light on changing patterns of vegetation and climate over the last 10,000 and more years. One area that has not been intensively studied, however, is the humid, subtropical region of southeastern China. This doctoral dissertation project will extract and analyze cores from bogs in the Wuyi and Daiyun mountains of Fujian Province. Radiocarbon dating will help establish the ages of pollen and sediments within the cores, and related analyses will help reconstruct vegetational and climatic patterns in the region. This project will provide valuable information for reconstructing the natural environmental history of southeastern China. This reconstruction will be especially useful because it will help assess the impacts of changing conditions on monsoon circulation, which is such an important facet of the region's climate. This project also will provide an excellent opportunity for a promising young scholar to continue to develop independent research skills.

		3( 87 ). This project focuses on molecular systematics and biogeography of the fish genus Gambusia (Cyprinodontiformes, Poeciliidae). Samples of up to about 45 nominal species will be collected from Caribbean islands, Central America, and the southeastern United States in order to examine phylogenetic and zoogeographic relationships. Results from electophoresis and mitochondrial DNA restriction site analysis will be used to construct a phylogeny for the genus. These data are to be combined with morphological information, which thus far has been inconclusive in resolving taxonomy, to examine character congruence. Zoogeographic evidence will be compared to area cladograms constructed for other monophyletic taxa (of a single ancestral origin) available in the scientific literature in order to test hypothesized vicariant events in the Caribbean region. The work will be performed at Auburn University by Charles Lydeard under the direction of Dr. Michael C. Wooten.

		4( 99 ). Much of the economic activity in cities located in developing nations is conducted by persons who operate informally. These people work independently or in small organizations in ways that circumvent formal government control or supervision. The share of urban populations engaged in these types of activities has grown rapidly in recent decades, leading scholars to debate whether the informal economic sector functions as a separate unit or whether it performs within a broader framework within which formal economic establishments still maintain primary power. This doctoral dissertation project will examine the form and function of informal economic activities in Quito, Ecuador, in order to describe the structure and diversity of activities and to analyze how persons engaged in informal activities interact with each other and with other individuals and institutions. Labor-force data in Ecuador's three largest cities will be analyzed to compare formal-informal economic patterns, and interviews with persons engaged in informal activities will be conducted to examine links among persons in the informal sector, the formal sector, and the government. Attention also will be given to identifying how working relations affect the economic mobility of persons engaged in informal activities. This project will provide valuable data and analyses of the operations of persons engaged in informal economic activities. Although focusing on an Ecuadorian case study, the insights from this project will be of great use to persons conducting related work elsewhere. This project also will provide an excellent opportunity for a promising young scholar to continue to develop independent research skills.

		5( 140 ). Recently, organizational ecologists have studied the forces of competition and legitimation by analyzing organization's founding and failure rates. At the same time, economists have studied how forces of competition shape organizational size distributions. The proposed research will integrate these two perspectives by determining whether size gives organizations competitive advantages that decrease their chances of failure and increase their changes of growth. The study will also address whether changes in founding and failure rates cause changes in the level of resources available for organizational growth. Finally, the proposed research investigates how historical events have shaped processes of competition and legitimation. Data on banks in Manhattan will be used.

		6( 144 ). The history of sea level is an important component of paleoclimate research. It defines the history and rate of ice growth and melting, the slowest component of the atmosphere- ocean-cryosphere system. The best record of sea level is produced by using well-dated coral reef material. This proposal requests support to refine the sea level history for the last 125,000 years and to calibrate the 14C time scale for the last 40,000 years. The PIs will use the elevation and morphometry of the coral reef samples from Barbados and their radiometric ages to extend the sea level record to 125,000 years BP. Comparisons between 14C and 230Th ages of coral samples will be used to calibrate the 14C time scale. This research is important because it will: 1) develop the best possible record of sea level and 2) calibrate the 14C time scale back to about 40,000 years BP. Thus it will be possible to compare on the same time scale the records of climate and the astronomical variations which cause climate change.

		7( 184 ). This award will provide supplemental support to enable Dr. Frederick Bingham of Scripps Institute of Oceanography to conduct collaborative research for 12 months with Dr. Yoshiaki Toba of Tohoku University in Sendai, Japan. They will investigate interannual changes in the heat content of the western North Pacific Ocean, and the relationship of those changes to variability in the Kuroshio Current system. The oceans store heat from and release heat to the atmosphere depending on the season. With increasing concern about changes in the Earth's climate, it is critical to understand the mechanisms of heat transfer between the ocean and atmosphere. Professor Toba's research group has been studying the dynamics of air-sea interactions in the western North Pacific for many years and their extensive, long-term data sets will enable Dr. Bingham to quantitatively assess interannual variability in the heat content within that complex oceanographic region.

		8( 187 ). Under the guidance of Dr. Susan McIntosh, Ms. Helen Haskell will conduct archaeological survey and excavation in the Mema or "Dead Delta" region of Mali. The results of this work will form the basis for her doctoral dissertation. The Mema, as geomorphological data indicates, was once a well watered region which coincided with the inland delta of the Niger River. A change in the river's course has turned the region to desert. The small amount of archaeological research which has been done in the region indicates that it contains archaeological sites which probably span several millennia. They include at least two which document the transition from a pure hunting and gathering existence to one which incorporated livestock and domesticated plants. The goal of Ms. Haskell's research is to shed light on this transition period. Guiding herself with aerial photographs, Ms. Haskell will conduct a vehicle survey of the region, noting both ancient landforms and scatters of archaeological materials. In conjunction, these data will provide information on prehistoric landscape use. She will also conduct test excavations at two sites and collect pottery, stone tools, and other cultural remains as well as floral and faunal materials. This project is important for several reasons. First, it will fill in what is almost a complete archaeological blank. It will provide information on how cultures at a very simple level of technology adapted to a rigorous Saharan environment and, hopefully, shed light on the introduction of agriculture and pastoralism to sub-Saharan Africa. Finally, it will aid in the training of an extremely promising young scientist.

		9( 207 ). Between 10% and 40% of the Vanadium and Uranium entering the modern ocean as dissolved river input is eventually buried in sediments overlain by anoxic bottom water. Previous work by Dr. Mix and his colleague Dr. Emeron from the University of Washington has found that concentrations of V and U in foram tests have varied over the last 150 Kyrs. Provided the assumption is true tht formas incorporated these metals in equilibrium with seawater, this preliminary data suggests that bottom, water during the last glacial period was more oxygenated that at present, and that between Atlantic and Pacific bottom water was substantially different from that of today. In this renewal award the PIs will to continue their research in several directins: 1) they will perform culturing experiments with collaborator Dr. Erez in Israel to determine the uptake patterns of V and U in live forams; 2) they will improve solid source mass spectometry techniques for measuring V and U in single species of forams; and 3) they will apply these techniques to refine the history of anoxia in the world's oceans since the last interglacial

		10( 211 ). Historical perspective is essential in order to understand the nature of the relationship between human activity and the environment and to evaluate long-term productivity of sustainability or impact. The introduction of livestock into Mexico in the sixteenth century modified the subsistence strategies of the indigenous population as well as the pre-existing dynamic equilibrium among the population, production systems, and the environment. This doctoral dissertation research will document the development of the livestock industry in the Coixtlahuaca Basin of northwestern Oaxaca, Mexico, and it will examine that industry's impact on the way of life of the population and on the regional environment over the last 450 years. This project will combine data from field observations with information derived from archival research. The investigator will map current and past land uses and will establish and date depositional sediment and paleosol sequences along several stream channels. He will review ethnohistorical sources from which information on land uses, economic activities, community boundaries, resource availability, droughts, crop failures, diseases and populations of the area will be extracted, and he will compare these data with those of the present. Our understanding of long-term processes relating to environmental and cultural systems remains limited. This study is unusual in its effort to delineate the man-land relationship in the past and to carry the relationship through to the present. The research will contribute to the scientific basis of our understanding of human-environmental relationships. The project also will provide an excellent opportunity for a promising young scholar to continue to develop independent research skills.

		11( 219 ). This research will continue a project to study climatically induced changes in biogenic sedimentation in the oceans. The type of biogenic material found in core samples varies with the paleoclimate and, therefore, appears to be temperature controlled. This research project will develop more rapid methods for doing the analysis of the biogenic material, an extend the earlier studies to both older sediment and other cores where independent estimates of paliotemperature have been made. The results of this research will lead to the understanding of causes for changes in primary productivity in the oceans during climatic changes.

		12( 220 ). This award will provide supplementary support to enable Dr. Jaxk Reeves of the University of Georgia to conduct collaborative research for 12 months with Dr. Masami Hasegawa of the Institute of Statistical Mathematics in Tokyo, Japan. Using the complete mitochondrial genome of several completely sequenced animal species (human, cow, mouse, frog, fruit fly), the researchers will apply statistical techniques to obtain estimates and standard errors thereof of the long-term substitution rates of the elemental DNA bases (A,C,G,T). In addition, they will obtain estimates and standard errors of the relative time-distances between various species' branchings. The approach to be used is novel in that the complete mitochondrial DNA genome of five animal species will be used; approximately 16,500 base pairs for each. This will allow the researchers to address the questions of whether the rate of specific base pair substitution has been approximately constant over the millions of years of evolutionary history, and what effect position in the sequence has on substitution rates. Dr. Hasegawa is an established leader in the application of statistics to the field of genetics, and the Institute of Statistical Mathematics should prove an ideal environment for Dr. Reeves to pursue and expand his research.

		13( 221 ). Alluvial terrace and valley deposits are important sources of information about environmental changes, but the complex ways in which processes operate within river valleys and also in upstream and downstream areas makes interpretation of sediments difficult. Also troublesome are problems in assuring that the dating of sediments is accurate. Radiocarbon-dating methods have somewhat alleviated the latter difficulties, but comprehensive analyses of the dynamics of valley sedimentation based on more accurate chronologies have not been undertaken in many settings. This doctoral dissertation research project will develop a detailed chronology of alluvial change over the last 25,000 for the lower Colorado River valley of the Texas coastal plain. The chronology and analyses will be based on field mapping, on radiocarbon dating of important stratigraphic sections, and on reconstruction of depositional environments and sedimentary provenance for all stratigraphic units. The lower Colorado alluvial record will be compared with radiocarbon-controlled sequences from the upper Colorado River drainage basin and with records of sea-level rise and shoreline change along the Gulf of Mexico to address the relative roles of upstream, downstream, and internal factors as influences on the development of fluvial landforms in the lower Colorado valley. This project will provide valuable information about the timing and processes of landscape change in the study area. Because research methods to be used in this locale have been used elsewhere, this case study will contribute toward comparative analyses of regional landscape evolution and paleoenvironmental change. It also will provide an excellent opportunity for a promising young scholar to continue to develop independent research skills.

		14( 246 ). This dissertation will examine the contribution Catholic pastoral agents make to socioeconomic development in Latin America through a case study of the Diocese of Cuenca in the highland province of Azuay, Ecuador. The study will explore the development strategies of pastoral agents and the outcomes of efforts to promote social change. Special focus is on how and why pastoral agents adopt different methods of working in their parishes, and do so with varying rates of success and failure. Seven variables will be studied: ideology, the background and knowledge of pastoral agents, resource availability and mobilization, social networks, access and use of organizations, and parish structure.

		15( 250 ). Stones often are found along relatively horizontal planes within soils, appearing as lines in soil cuts, thereby leading to their designation as stone lines. The morphology of stone lines long has been explained in terms of accumulation of mass-wasted or wind-blown deposits over previously settled materials, but recent studies have indicated that stone may be realigned within the same soils through the actions of small mammals and insects. This doctoral dissertation project will test the hypothesis that both the stone line within the Sangamon soil layer in central Illinois and the overlying layer of coarser material are the products of sorting activities by mound- building animals. Stone lines from a sample of sites among drumlins in McDonough County will be examined through analyses of the location and orientation of stones and through biofabric analysis of the materials, which will provide information on the environmental conditions under which the soils evolved. This project will provide a well-structured test of competing hypotheses regarding soil morphology, shedding light on the conditions at the study site and for a broader range of locales. This project also will provide an excellent opportunity for a promising young scholar to continue to develop independent research skills.

		16( 257 ). The objective of this dissertation is to explore the impact of organizational linkages, class linkages, and the local organization of work on the structures and ideology of contemporary Latin American popular religious organizations, both evangelical and Catholic. A case-based comparative approach is taken to data gathering and analysis. Cases (within the metropolitan area of Caracas, Venezuela) will be chosen on the basis of the class composition of the neighborhood and type of organizational network within which the local church is embedded. In keeping with the community studies tradition, techniques will include participant observation, interviews with leaders, and member surveys, as well as analysis of background information on the communities. The study will fill a gap in substantive knowledge and contribute to understanding the relation between religion and social class.

		17( 267 ). The development of geographic information systems (GISs) as analytic tools has been parallelled by attempts to create media that allow people with varied skills and backgrounds to manipulate and interpret computer-based spatial data. The construction of more effective general user interfaces has been inhibited, however, by the fact that people structure and deal with geographic relationships in different ways. Language influences the ways in which people perceive spatial relationships, but little attention has been given by scholars to determining how linguistic differences affect the ways in which people use GISs. This doctoral dissertation research project will examine different ways in which English-speaking and Spanish-speaking persons describe, structure, and manage spatial relationships. An oral questionnaire dealing with common spatial relationships will be administered to persons in Spain, Ecuador, and the United States; persons in those nations also will experiment with different types of GIS user interfaces to determine if different formats are more effective for person speaking different languages. This project will provide a valuable test of different GIS user interface formats in different linguistic settings, thereby helping to identify the degree to which linguistic differences must be accommodated in the development of "user-friendly" GISs. The study will enhance understandings of the ways in which language helps structure individual understandings of spatial relationships, and it will provide an excellent opportunity for a promising young scholar to continue to develop independent research skills.

		18( 274 ). This dissertation research explores the tension between feminist critiques of bureaucracy and feminist organizational practice. The student will conduct the study in three stages. In the first she will examine questions of external and internal influences on organizational structure by means of a self- administered questionnaire. In the second she will examine changes in organizational form through semi-structured telephone interviews with members of 20 organizations. She will then try in the third stage to explain why some groups are better able to maintain alternative organizational structures. Information will be gathered through participant observation in three organizations representative of the range of organizational forms.

		19( 276 ). This a 4-year project to investigate (1) greenhouse-gas- induced equilibrium climate change (2) greenhouse-gas-induced transient climate change, and (3) cloud optical depth feedback. A coupled ocean-atmosphere GCM will be used to perform several 100 year climate simulations under different C02 radiative forcing scenarios. This investigation is important because it's successful completion will help determine whether it is possible to detect the greenhouse signal in the climate record of the past 100 years, and whether changes in cloud optical depth act to enhance or diminish global warming.

		20( 300 ). Under the guidance of Dr. Susan McIntosh, Mr. Tereba Togola will conduct archaeological survey and excavation in the Mema or "Dead Delta" region of Mali. The results of this work will form the basis for his doctoral dissertation. The Mema, as geomorphological data indicates, was once a well watered region which coincided with the inland delta of the Niger River. A change in the river's course has turned the region to desert. The small amount of archaeological research which has been done in the region indicates that it contains archaeological sites which probably span several millennia. Areal photographs, however, indicate that the region is dotted with possibly hundreds of "tells" or habitation mounds. Past uncontrolled excavations recovered such artifacts as statuettes of horseman, iron spear and arrowheads, and multi-legged vases. However, faunal and floral remains were not collected and the subsistence base for this culture remains unknown. Likewise neither an absolute nor a relative chronology exists. Through a combination of survey, correlation of sites with ancient landforms, and excavation at several sites, Mr. Togola will collect both chronological and subsistence information. This project is important for several reasons. First, it will fill in what is almost a complete archaeological blank. It will provide information on how cultures at a very simple level of technology adapted to a rigorous Saharan environment and, hopefully, shed light on the development of agriculture pastoralism and early iron working in sub-Saharan Africa. It should also provide information on the rise of African kingdoms. Finally, it will aid in the training of an extremely promising young scientist.

		21( 304 ). The stability of the West Antarctic ice sheet (WAIS) is an issue of immediate global importance because the ice sheet contains enough water to raise sea level over 5 meters. If the ice sheet experiences a rapid collapse, the accompanying rapid rise in sea level will have dire consequences along coastlines worldwide. The urgency of assessing the stability of the WAIS is fueled by the recent discoveries made by the Siple Coast Project (SCP) of significant changes taking place in West Antarctica. However, the SCP has had a glaciological focus and has not properly assessed the important meteorological and oceanic effects. which play a major role in determining the behavior of the ice sheet and its impact on global climate. What is needed is a multi-disciplinary study of the WAIS where studies in all relevant disciplines are conducted. A plan to integrate these separate investigations is a necessary first step to achieving the goal of understanding the global role of the WAIS and its stability. What is proposed here is to bring together experts from the important polar disciplines for a workshop to formulate a rational plan for the study of the WAIS. The acronym SEARISE (Stability of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet Environment) has been chosen for this program because it provides an identifiable focus of public concern.

		22( 307 ). This dissertation proposal aims to develop a better understanding of women's movement into management positions in corporate-government relations. This study provides a way to study an occupation whose gender composition is in transition and a basis for understanding a transition in the character and function of corporate-government relations. The student will investigate the behavior and organization of corporate political action committees (PACs). The study will facilitate understanding changes in the character and function of corporate-government relations and their relationship to the political goals of corporations. The student will interview in depth PAC officials and men and women in corporate-government relations. A survey based on the interviews will be mailed to government relations officers in 309 corporations.

		23( 309 ). This dissertation represents one of the first attempts to assess the structure of work organization and labor processes in a service industry. Most previous work has been confined to manual workers in manufacturing industries. This study examines the labor process in the hospital setting of a community health care system. It examines the social goals and rationales behind the design and deployment of hospital technologies and medical innovations and the complex relationship between technological change and the structure of work organization.

		24( 312 ). This dissertation research addresses three basic questions: (1) What is the organizational structure of the broadcast media of Jamaica, and how is that structure penetrated by outside interest groups? (2) What are the characteristics of the individuals who conceive and produce broadcast messages, both inside and outside formal mass media organizations? (3) How much of the content of broadcasting is related to issues of national development, and what is the extent of foreign media penetration? Several methods will be employed. She will interview relevant communications and government employees, analyze demographic information on communications and government workers, and analyze the program content of Jamaica's two radio networks and one television network longitudinally.

		25( 321 ). This award supports a program of research to study sediment accumulation rates in five transects of sediment cores that cross today's primary flow path of Arctic bound Atlantic water (e.g., the West Spitsbergen Current). Because the Wets Spitsbergen Current). Because the West Spitsbergen Current is the primary importer of ocean heat to the High Arctic, and is responsible for maintaining the sea-ice free conditions in the Norwegian Sea, detailed knowledge of the history of this current is critical to a complete understanding of the transition form the last glaciation to the present warm, interglacial climate state. Thermohaline processes on the broad Arctic margin shelves play an important role in the thermohaline circulation of the Arctic Seas. This project will examine whether the West Spitsbergen Continental Shelf was glaciated during the Last Glacial Maximum (approximately 18 thousand years ago). Ship time is provided at no charge to this proposal by the Norwegian Polar Research Institute.

		26( 331 ). This dissertation proposal investigates changes in men's and women's strategies to move through the marriage-divorce- remarriage process. She uses social exchange theory, a microstructural approach to human agency, and network influences in the construction of reality. The goal of the research is to learn how change, as well as consistency, in strategies used by each gender is affected by dependency on marriage, the reason for divorce, and the person's social network. The student will survey 200 remarried individuals (100 couples) and interview a subsample of 50 couples.

		27( 353 ). Relatively little is known about the environments of central North America during the early and middle parts of the Wisconsin glacial period, which extended roughly from 70,000 to 25,000 years before the present. Few deposits of materials from the period remain; one of the most important formations that does exist is the Roxana loess, a fine, wind-blown material found in the upper Mississippi River valley. Scientists have disagreed about the origins of these deposits, however, with each alternative explanation providing markedly different interpretation of prevailing environmental conditions. This doctoral dissertation project will use geochemical, particle-size, mineralogical, and radiocarbon analyses to determine the source materials and age of Roxana loess deposits in the Mississippi River valley between LaCrosse, Wisconsin, and Rock Island, Illinois. The results of these analyses will be compared with comparable analyses of deposits from the Illinois River valley to determine whether the loess is composed of materials from local or from glacially transported sources, and the results will provide a firmer basis from which to infer large- and smaller-scale paleoenvironmental conditions and geomorphic processes during the early- and middle-Wisconsin period. This research will provide valuable information for scientists conducting geomorphic and paleoenvironmental research in the upper Midwest, and it will contribute toward reconstruction of regional conditions during the last ice age. The project also will provide an excellent opportunity for a promising young scholar to continue to develop independent research skills.

		28( 354 ). This dissertation research in cultural anthropology studies the effects on children's health of the education of mothers, the composition of the household, and involvement of mothers in local woman's associations. The research takes place in a rural area of Cameroon. Methods include a census and health survey of the community, bi-monthly health surveys of a sample of households for a year, intensive case studies of at least five households, and informal interviews with a wide range of government officials, health workers and family/community members. This research is significant because it will contribute to the field of medical anthropology, and will provide health planners with valuable information on the social mechanisms involved in child health.

		29( 360 ). This research program is part of the initiative to collect perishable data resulting from the 17 October 1989 Northern California (Loma Prieta) earthquake. The objective is to obtain data on the performance of five soil nailed walls in the San Francisco Bay area during the Loma Prieta earthquake. This perishable data will be compared at a later time with the pre- earthquake measurements on the same walls, in order to evaluate the performance of soil nailed walls under seismic conditions. Soil nailing is a construction procedure used to shore vertical soil cuts for temporary or permanent purposes. Related procedures included conventional soldier pile and tie- back systems. Because of the uncertainties involved with the design of soil nailed walls, building officials have expressed concern regarding soil nailing (Engineering News Record, October 5, 1898). As a result, Professor Felio was appointed Chairman of the American Society of Civil Engineers-Los Angeles Section Task Committee on Soil Nailing in order to establish design, construction, and monitoring guidelines for the City of Los Angeles. This committee has been collecting information on the subject as well as contacting researchers, constructors, and designers in the United States for information. The survey is being supervised by Professor Felio and Mr. Pirooz Barar of Pirooz Barar and Associates, San Francisco, a soil nailing designer in California with experience in supervising the construction of soil nailed walls in San Francisco, Oakland, and the Los Angeles area.


	Top Words:
		1. CHANGES
		2. ORGANIZATIONAL
		3. DISSERTATION
		4. CLIMATE
		5. REGION


Cluster 17

	Documents:
		1( 12 ). Research focuses on development of models for performance evaluation of the following types of queueing systems: (i) polling systems, where a central computer polls terminals that share a single transmission channel (such as a token ring LAN) and (ii) database systems, where records are inserted into and deleted from file structures called buckets. The study will include both the development of the underlying mathematical theory of queues (such as the fundamental M/G/1 model, vacation models, cyclic- service models and multiserver systems with ordered hunt) and the practical application to the performance analysis for real systems.

		2( 37 ). This proposal is to continue research in several areas of nonlinear applied dynamics. Excitable systems---systems which can be triggered by a small stimulus---arise as models of several physiological and chemical phenomena. It is proposed to study such systems, with an emphasis on understanding the periodic and aperiodic behavior that is seen. Another project is studying models of polymerization reactors with multiple initiators, in collaboration with some chemical engineers. The emphasis is to model industrial processes as completely as possible and understand behaviors of reactors under different operating conditions so as to effect control, and in particular, prevent catastrophic runaway of reactors. It is also proposed to continue work on understanding the stability of standing-and travelling-wave solutions of parabolic differential equations.

		3( 54 ). Professor Sandra Greer is supported by a grant from the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program to study the density, heat capacity and phase equilibria of polymerizing liquids; she will also be testing a number of theoretical models that may be applicable to them. This work will help us to understand how and why polymerization occurs ultimately allowing us to design and produce better plastics, synthetic oils and clothing materials. Greer is pursuing a two pronged attack to find out firstly, if certain theoretical models that have been proposed do in fact correctly predict the behavior of reversible polymerization. These systems often refered to as "living polymers" because the polymer-monomer equilbrium can be reversibly shifted by temperature changes; thus, mimicking chemical equilbrium behavior. Secondly, Greer will examine the concept of Wheeler et al. that the static properties (density and heat capacity) can, in fact, be treated as critical phenomena. Moreover, Greer hopes to see whether or not the theories used to predict and describe phase transitions in magnets can also be used to describe her "living polymer" systems' reversible equilibria properties.

		4( 91 ). It is the purpose of the proposed research to examine how the creation of burrows and reworking of the sediment by organisms effects the rate and degree of chemical reactions within these sediments. In particular the P.I. will study the effects of these parameters on the chemical behavior of the elements manganese, nitrogen and carbon. The eventual goals of the project are: 1) to create quantitative descriptions (using a mathematical model or models) of the types of transport and reaction distribution occurring during early diagenesis, and 2) to understand better the implications of the transports and distributions on the geochemistry and ecology of the sediments.

		5( 113 ). Professor Radin will continue his research on the question of why certain types of matter are in an ordered state at low temperature. Recent results have shown that generically, perfect (crystalline) order at zero temperature is not to be expected. Radin's research will involve nonperiodic tilings and uniquely ergodic symbolic dynamical systems to determine the range of disorder that can be produced at zero and low temperature.


	Top Words:
		1. SYSTEMS
		2. MODELS
		3. REACTORS
		4. GREER
		5. TEMPERATURE


Cluster 18

	Documents:
		1( 15 ). The high field NMR Spectrometer is the single most important tool available to organic and inorganic chemists for structure determination, and it is becoming a significantly useful technique for analytical chemists and biochemists. This award from the Chemistry Shared Instrumentation Program will help the Department of Chemistry at University of the Pacific acquire a high field NMR Spectrometer. The NMR Spectrometer will be used in the following research topics: 1. NMR Studies of DNA-Polyamine and DNA-Histone Interactions 2. Synthesis and Characterization of Macrocyclic Multinuclear Systems 3. Reactions of Phosphoranyl Radicals with Unsaturated Disulfides 4. Synthetic and Conformational studies of Nitrogen Containing Carbohydrates 5. Synthesis of Inhibitors of Enzymes with Acetylated and Deacetylated Polyamines

		2( 97 ). The Synthetic Organic Program will support the research of Dr. Peter A. Jacobi of the Department of Chemistry at Wesleyan University by means of an Accomplishment Based Renewal award. He will continue to develop methodology that leads to the preparation of ring-containing organic molecules. The specific process, known as bis-heteroannulation, affords fused-ring furans, prepared with complete regiochemical control. The key element in Dr. Jacobi's approach involves the intramolecular Diels-Alder reaction between an oxazole and an acetylene. In addition to the bis-heteroannulation work, tandem sigmatropic rearrangements will be used for the tranformation of acetylenic alcohols or enones into methylenecyclopentanones or phenols. Syntheses of a number of naturally occuring phenols and sesquiterpenes will illustrate the usefulness of the methodology.

		3( 122 ). This project in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program is in the general area of main-group chemistry and in the specific area of boron hydride chemistry. Boron-hydrogen compounds are of considerable practical interest as starting materials for the synthesis of new materials or for improved syntheses of known materials, such as metal borides. The goal of this project is to develop new synthetic strategies to facilitate high yield selective transformations in boron hydride chemistry. Of especial interest is the use of transition metals to catalyze transformations of polyhedral boranes and carboranes. The use of ruthenium carbonyl compounds to catalyze the insertion of alkynes into polyhedral carboranes will be investigated. Metal-catalyzed alkyne and olefin addition and coupling reactions will be used for the synthesis of alkenyl- and alkyl-boranes. Late transition elements will be investigated as catalysts for isomerizations of carborane cages. Transition metals, particularly Pt(II), will be investigated also as catalysts for dehydro-coupling, -condensation, -cyclization and -cage growth reactions of boranes. In a second major sub-project the syntheses and chemical and structural properties of hybrid polyhedral boranes, such as hypho-dithiaborane clusters, will be investigated.

		4( 135 ). Northwestern University will purchase an inductively coupled plasma spectrometer in order to carry out analyses of chemical elements in the fields of anthropology, biophysics, and bioinorganic chemistry. The instrument is needed by the faculties of the Department of Chemistry and the Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology, and Cell Biology for research in the following areas: 1. Diet and the inorganic analysis of excavated human bone 2. Heavy metals in biological systems 3. Long-range electron transfer and hemoglobin function 4. Polynucleotide coordination chemistry of metallocene antitumor agents At present, the institution does not have an inductively coupled plasma spectrometer, so its acquisition will be a significant addition, enhancing both current and future research efforts.

		5( 136 ). In this project ("Cyclic and Polycyclic Organostannanes") in the Organic Dynamics Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Lawrence R. Sita in the Chemistry Department at Carneige Mellon University will study the bonding, physical, and structural properties of cyclic and polycyclic compounds of tin. Some of the results from this study will lead to new insights concerning the design of new materials for solid state applications. This study of "Cyclic and Polycyclic Organostannanes" will bridge the curent gap in knowledge concerning the structure, bonding, and physical properties of cyclic and polycyclic compounds of tin. The nature of bonding available to Group 14 elements within ring-strained systems, the development of new synthetic methodology which will facilitate the construction of a desired cyclic or polycyclic organostannane framework, the refinement of structure/bonding/physical property relationships for tin, and the development of new spectroscopic techniques such as Sn-119 NMR, electrochemistry, and electron spin resonance (ESR) for investigating the molecular and electronic structure of cyclic and polycyclic organostannanes are being studied

		6( 138 ). A detailed study of intra- and intermolecular interactions in more complicated structures -- DNA, polypetides and small proteins, complex natureal products, polymetallic species and enzyme mimics requires less routine 1D NMR experiments, pulse sequences for various 2D NMR experiemtns, solvent supression, and variable temperature experiments. Multinuclear high field NMRs are ideally suited for use in these more complicated structures. The results from these NMR studies are useful in areas, such as polymers, catalysis, and in biology. This award from the Chemistry Shared Instrumentation Program will help the Department of Chemsitry at the University of Illinois acquire 400 MHz NMR spectrometer. The 400 MHz NMR spectrometer will be used in research investigations in the following areas of chemistry: 1. Specificity of Isoprenoid Biosynthesis and New Methodology for Organic Synthesis 2. Synthetic and Mechanistic Studies of Transition Metal- Mediated Organic Reactions 3. Selective Oxidation Chemistry on Soluble Oxides 4. Dimensional Probes of Enzyme-Coenzyme Binding Sites - 2D NMR Techniques 5. New Coordination Modes for Thiophene Complexation 6. Selective Oxidation with Osmium (VI) and Ruthenium (VI) Organometallic Complexes 7. Synthetic Analogues of Heme Proteins 8. Need for Fluorine NMR Capability 9. Structures and Biosynthesis of Antibiotics and Marine- Dervied Compounds 10. Synthetic and Mechanistic Investigations in Organic Chemistry 11. Further Studies of the Triplex Diels-Alder Reaction 12. Synthetic Structural and Mechanistic Organic Chemistry

		7( 170 ). The Synthetic Organic Program is funding the research of Dr. Eric Block of the Department of Chemistry at the State University of New York (SUNY) at Albany. Dr. Block will continue his studies on the chemistry of the organic compounds of sulfur. Major areas of concern include the development of useful new sulfur-containing reagents for organic synthesis, the investigation of the structure, synthesis and reactions of unusual organosulfur compounds from onion and the study of important but little studied classes of organosulfur compounds. A novel class of reagents that permit the controlled growth of carbon-containing rings through "iterative Diels-Alder reactions" will be studied. Syntheses will be attempted that will afford polyacenes, compounds that are linear molecules containing side-by-side fused benzene rings, which, in the polymer (C4H2)n extreme, have been predicted to be electrical conductors. Related reagents will be used to develop a new synthesis of fused cyclopentadienes and a novel, catalytic process for the generation and trapping of singlet disulfur.

		8( 202 ). This project is in the area of Analytical and Surface Chemistry and in the subfield of analytical fluorescence spectroscopy. Professor Warner will study interactions between cyclodextrans with a series of polyaromatic hydrocarbons using a suite of spectroscopic methods. This research will use infrared spectroscopy, circular dichroism spectroscopy, x-ray crystallography and fluorescence spectroscopy to elucidate the molecule details of complexation between cyclodextrans and polyaromatic hydrocarbons together with the ternary effects arising from addition of alcohols. The results from this research will be useful in developing analytical measurements for naturally chiral compounds and for compounds with induced chirality.

		9( 230 ). In this project in the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Hall will develop new mathematical models for the study of clusters of metals such as sodium. This will eventually lead to more complex investigations of disordered condensed phases. The path integral formulation of quantum mechanics will be used to study sodium metal clusters, the elctron gas, and as a means for determining the Mott transition in sodium. The long term goal of this research is to develop methods that are capable of determining correlated electron properties in disordered condensed phase systems. The studies of sodium metal clusters will focus on determining the extent of electron delocalization as a function of cluster size. The electron gas and bulk sodium calculations will investigate aspects of the insulator-metal transition.

		10( 237 ). Dr. Nancy E. Levinger has been awarded a Postdoctoral Resaerch Fellowship in Chemistry. Dr. Levinger's doctoral degree was from the University of Colorado under the supervision of Professor W. Carl Lineberger. Dr. Levinger intends to continue research at the University of Minnesota under the sponsorship of Professor Paul Barbara. Dr. Levinger's area of training and research will be the role of solvation in chemical reactions at a molecular level. Femtosecond spectroscopy will be used to distinguish solvent-mediated intermolecular charge-transfer reactions from intramolecular charge-transfer reactions. The Postdoctoral Fellowships in Chemistry Program is viewed as an important infrastructural program designed to broaden the knowledge and experience of new Ph.D's and attract them into meaningful careers in contemporary chemical research and teaching.

		11( 253 ). Dr. Erwin D. Poliakoff is supported by a grant from the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program to study synchrotron radiation induced fluorescence from molecular ions. These measurements give valuable insight into how electronic and nuclear motions are correlated in excited molecules; moreover, these results will also tell us about the origins of various light sources in the galaxy. This work focuses on the correlation of electronic and nuclear motion (Franck-Condon breakdown), as well as related electron correlation effects (continuum coupling). Dispersed fluorescence has been used in previous work to demonstrate that resolution is not limited by the excitation band width. This capability will permit studies that would not otherwise be feasible, including work on the photoionization of van der Waals species, transfer of shape resonant character between ionization continua and fluorescence from doubly-charged diatomic ions.

		12( 258 ). This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the work of Dr. Joseph J. Grabowski at Harvard University. The results of this investigation will provide new insights into the fundamental details of the processes by which chemical reactions take place. Dr. Grabowski will employ the Flowing Afterglow and Selected Ion Flow Tube techniques to examine, probe, and define mechanisms of gas-phase, organic, ion-molecule reactions. Competitive reactions will be employed so that accurate product ratios will provide direct information about the alternative reaction channels in the absence of solvent effects. Both positive-ion and negative-ion systems will be studied, and the investigation will focus on comparisons of such reaction pairs as elimination-substitution, competitive H-atom transfers, and reactions at differently hybridized carbon centers in the same molecule.

		13( 266 ). Dr. Daryl R. Sauer has been awarded a Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Chemistry. Dr. Sauer's doctoral degree was from the University of South Florida under the supervision of Professor Stewart Schneller. Dr. Sauer intends to continue research at Ohio State University under the sponsorship of Professor Leo Paquette. Dr. Sauer's area of postdoctoral training and research will be the design and synthesis of architecturally novel compounds of theoretical interest, development of new synthetic methodology, and the synthesis of natural and unnatural molecules which possess biological activity. The Postdoctoral Fellowships in Chemistry Program is viewed as an important infrastructural program designed to broaden the knowledge and experience of new Ph.Ds and attract them into meaningful careers in contemporary chemical research and teaching.

		14( 279 ). This award will support Professor Richard D. Gonzalez of the University of Illinois at Chicago Circle in collaboration with Professor Ricardo Gomez of the Metropolitan University of Mexico at Iztapalapa. Studies recently completed suggest that metal-precursor-support interactions are important in determining the resulting surface composition of supported multimetallic catalysts. In particular, the presence of a mobile surface metal-precursor results in the surface enrichment of that metal in the resulting bimetallic catalyst. The investigators aim to identify the structure of these precursor-surface complexes using diffuse U.V. reflectance spectroscopy. The strength of the metal-support interactions will be measured through the use of quantitative differential scanning calorimetry and the elemental composition of the resulting bimetallic particles will be obtained through the use of dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDXS). EDXS will also be used to study interparticle metal phase relationships. The proposed research will be carried out simultaneously at the University of Illinois at Chicago and the Metropolitan University of Mexico at Iztapalapa. The in-situ diffuse U.V. reflectance studies, the microcalorimetric DSC studies and the catalyst charac- terization studies, including the surface composition measurements, will be carried out at the University of Illinois. The catalytic probe reactions and major portion of the EDXS studies will be performed in Mexico.

		15( 285 ). Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Sepctroscopy is the most powerful tool available to the chemist for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is used to identify unknown substances, characterized specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution. Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometry is essential to chemists who are carrying out frontier research. This award from the Chemistry Shared Instrumentation Program will help the Chemistry Department of the Illinois State University, to acquire, operate and maintain a high-field NMR spectrometer. The acquisition of the instrument will enhance the ability of the Department to prepare undergraduate and graduate students for possible careers in chemistry and will enhance research in the following areas: 1. studies of geochemical compounds; 2. studies of the effect of neutrons on electron transfer reactions; 3. studies of synthetic methods using a one carbon reactant; 4. studies on organo-metallic compounds.

		16( 308 ). This research is being funded by the Organic Synthesis Chemistry Program. Dr. Hendrickson is developing a computer based system to aid in the complicated process of synthesizing the variety of structures that are found in nature or the new molecules needed to meet the demands of our society. The computer provides an important tool in making choices among the myriad possible routes to synthesize new structures in an efficient and economic manner. The first version of a computer program (SYNGEN) was developed which creates the shortest synthesis routes of construction reactions only by a protocol based on convergent assembly of the target molecule from real starting materials in a catalog. The program proceeds without resort to a database library of reactions and without operator intervention. The program will be developed into a fully practical tool for organic chemists, refining the presentation to present the best routes foremost and to offer literature precedents on command. Ancillary developments will include several new strategies for synthesis design and expanded capabilities into special chemistry. The reaction and starting material bases available for synthesis will be organized and used to assess the nature of existing syntheses in the literature to gain more insight into the logic of design strategies in actual use.

		17( 320 ). Dr. Catherine Murphy has been awarded a Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Chemistry. Dr. Murphy's doctoral degree was from the University of Wisconsin under the supervision of Professor Arthur Ellis. Dr. Murphy intends to continue research at the California Institute of Technology under the sponsorship of Professor Jacqueline Barton. Dr. Murphy's area of postdoctoral training and research will be the application of solid state inorganic chemistry to problems of biological interest. As a specific example, she will investigate photoluminesence of adsorbed semiconductor colloids onto biological surfaces as a probe of molecular conformation. The Postdoctoral Fellowships in Chemistry Program is viewed as an important infrastructural program designed to broaden the knowledge and experience of new Ph.D's and attract them into meaningful careers in contemporary chemical research and teaching.

		18( 322 ). Dr. Silvia Lopez has been awarded a Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Chemistry. Dr. Lopez's doctoral degree was from Cornell University under the supervision of Professor Hector Abruna. Dr. Lopez intends to continue research at the University of Minnesota under the sponsorship of Professor Henry S. White. Dr. Lopez's area of postdoctoral research will be studies of the dynamics of electrocrystallization of low dimensional solids. By carefully controlling electrode potentials, Dr. Lopez will be able to monitor crystallization of specific phases by scanning tunneling microscopy. The Postdoctoral Fellowships in Chemistry Program is viewed as an important infrastructural program designed to broaden the knowledge and experience of new Ph.D's and attract them into meaningful careers in contemporary chemical research and teaching.

		19( 332 ). The application of this state-of-the-art Solid State NMR Spectrometer is for the characterization of traditional and unique materials formed from various types of composites, polymer blends, glasses, and ceramics. Detection of various nuclei of H, C, N, Al, Si, and P isotopes are included, along with studies of polymers used in non-linear optics and membranes for separation technology. Other materials include organometallic precursors to nitrides and carbides, organic precursors to inorganic ceramics, and various intermediates involved in the calcination process.

		20( 334 ). This grant is in the general area of analytical and surface chemistry and in the subfield of laser spectroscopy of liquid solid interfaces. Professor Robert Corn will develop the theoretical and experimental description of monolayers of mixed molecular species at metal electrode interfaces. The second harmonic generation and sum frequency generation methods developed by Professor Corn will be combined with infrared spectroscopic measurements of mixed monolayers of molecular species controlled by electrochemical potential on a metal electrode. These studies will allow fuller understanding of the role of interfacial molecular structure on electron transfer processes which occur at these interfaces. In addition, the methodology will allow more complete description of other liquid solid interfaces of import in a variety of chemical and technological processes. By combining second harmonic generation (SHG) on and off resonance analysis and theoretical description of the response using Pople-Pariser-Parr formalism to describe the molecular polarizability tensors, the first measurements of molecular orientation response in SHG have been made. Professor Corn will extend these measurements in combination with infrared reflection absorption and sum frequency generation to fully characterize mixed monolayers of molecular species at single crystal electrode liquid interfaces.

		21( 337 ). The Synthetic Organic Program is supporting the research of Dr. Kevin M. Smith of the Department of Chemistry at the University of California-Davis. Professor Smith is engaged in a broad-based and wide-ranging study of the synthesis, biosynthesis, chemistry, and spectroscopy of chlorophylls and bacteriochlorophylls. Chlorophylls are the catalysts in the vital process of photosynthesis and are involved in light gathering (antenna systems) as well as in the process of charge separation (in the reaction center). Current work focuses on the investigation of the chemical and biochemical basis for the methylation of bacteriochlorophyll-c and -d pigments which causes shifts in the cell absorption maxima, enabling the bacterium to adapt to conditions of low light. Esterifying alcohols on bacteriochlorophylls-c and -d molecules will be correlated with age of culture and extent of alkylation. Biosynthetic studies will also be undertaken; these involve biosynthesis of bacteriochlorophylls-c and -d, using isotopically enriched (carbon-13 and carbon-14) precursors to determine the branchpoint from chlorophyll-a biosynthesis and the latter stages in bacteriochlorophyll-a biosynthesis. A chemical synthesis of chlorophyll-a and its 4-vinyl analog, conversion of the former into the latter, and a biomimetic ring-cleavage of chlorophyll derivatives for chemical synthesis of certain photochemically active active bilins (e.g. phytochrome, which regulates plant growth and development) will be studied. Finally, chiral chlorophyll derivatives will facilitate synthesis of chiral N-alkylporphyrin ferrochelatase inhibitors, and chemical and electrochemical cyclizations of tetrapyrroles to give porphyrins will be investigated.

		22( 339 ). Dr. Vincent Rotello has been awarded a Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Chemistry. Dr. Rotello's doctoral degree was from Yale University under the supervision of Professor Harry Wasserman. Dr. Rotello intends to continue research at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology under the sponsorship of Professor Julius Rebek. Dr. Rotello's area of postdoctoral research and training will be molecular recognition and macromolecular catalysis. He will design molecular cleft hosts bound to flexible peptide fragments to maximize host-guest binding. These systems will serve as models for enzyme-substrate and antibody-hapten recognition. The Postdoctoral Fellowships in Chemistry Program is viewed as an important infrastructural program designed to broaden the knowledge and experience of recent Ph.D's and attract them into meaningful careers in contemporary chemical research and teaching.

		23( 345 ). This research program is being supported by the Organic Synthesis Program. Aspects of the chemistry of compounds containing sulphur, selenium and tellurium will be pursued which have the potential to impact on a diverse number of areas such as organic metals and optical sensors. The investigation in organochalcogen chemistry will emphasize the following areas: l. Organosulfur Chemistry The chemistry of little explored types of thiocarbonyl compounds will be studied (e.g., thioquinones, thionoanhydrides). Other sulfur heterocycles which are potential pi donors (e.g., tetrathiafulvalene derivatives, polythiophenes, etc.) or LB film candidates will also be objects of investigation. 2. Organoselenium Chemistry Attention will be focussed on new organoselenium reagents, new selenium-containing pi donors, and selenocarbonyl derivatives. 3. Organotellurium Chemistry New tellurium-containing TTF and vinylogous TTF derivatives will be synthesized. Attempts will be made to synthesize tellurium analogs of the well known 1,2,3-thiadiazoles. The chemistry of new tellurium-containing functional groups will be investigated.

		24( 365 ). Dr. Stephen E. Johnson has been awarded a Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Chemistry. Dr. Johnson's doctoral degree was from the University of Massachusetts under the supervision of Professor Robert Holmes. Dr. Johnson intends to continue research at UCLA under the sponsorship of Professor M. Frederick Hawthorne. Dr. Johnson's area of training and research will be structural, spectroscopic and theoretical studies of main-group rings, clusters and hypervalent species. Specific research targets will be the synthesis, catalytic and materials properties, and bioinorganic applications of multiply-bonded boron systems. The Postdoctoral Fellowships in Chemistry Program is viewed as an important infrastructural program designed to broaden the knowledge and experience of new Ph.D's and attract them into meaningful careers in contemporary chemical research and teaching.

		25( 367 ). This project examines transient liquid phase bonding with the aim of modeling this joining process and determining the effects of processing variables. The approach is aimed at predicting those alloy systems that respond to transient liquid phase bonding and quantifying important features of the process, such as the solidification kinetics, effects of solid solubility and phase equilibria, influence of surface tensions, generic design of interlayers, etc. Out of this research a clear rationale for design of interlayers based on thermodynamic and transport properties of the materials' systems should evolve. Potential future applications include transient liquid phase bonding of electronic packaging, advanced metal matrix composites, ceramic- to-metal bonding, and reactive metal joining.


	Top Words:
		1. CHEMISTRY
		2. DR
		3. POSTDOCTORAL
		4. SYNTHESIS
		5. NMR


Cluster 19

	Documents:
		1( 26 ). ABSTRACT The dissertation examines the acquisition of the tone and accent systems of KiVunjo Chagga, a Bantu language spoken in the Kilimanjaro region of Tanzania. Although it is widely believed that infants acquire prosodic systems very early, there is evidence from English and Asian tone languages that distinctive pitch is not acquired prior to segmental phonology. There has been no comprehensive study of the acquisition of tone in a Bantu-type tone language. This research pays particular attention to the development of distinctive tone, its relationship to the metrical accent system of KiVunjo, and the development of tone rules. Field research consists of a longitudinal naturalistic study of four children, two from age 2 and two from age 3, thereby covering the age range 2-4. The children will be audio recorded in their homes once a month for at least one year. Recording sessions will last an entire day, and will cover a wide range of the child's normal activities and interlocutors. Tapes will be transcribed immediately with the help of a native-speaker assistant, and transcripts will be entered into a computer. The resulting corpus will be available to other researchers.

		2( 29 ). This award will support study of the Japanese language by an American scientist or engineer by providing a stipend, tuition, or other course-related expenses. The objectives of the program are to enable active U.S. scientists and engineers to acquire sufficient familiarity with the language and customs of Japan to allow them to function independently there; or to acquire sufficient expertise in reading Japanese to be able to understand technical abstracts in their field of interest. There is a critical need for more effective technical communication between American and Japanese researchers. This award is intended to help remove language and cultural barriers to U.S.-Japanese cooperative research and to facilitate science and technology exchange.

		3( 32 ). This study involves an historical-comparative analysis of Hindu- Muslim enmity in four villages in rural West Bengal, India and Bangladesh. The objective is to gain an understanding of the processes by which people think about disputes, pursue conflict, and choose their enemies. With this kind of information, it may be possible to negotiate resolution of conflicts that occur in communally based ethnic, nationalist, and language-based conflicts.

		4( 79 ). This award will support study of the Japanese language by an American scientist or engineer by providing a stipend, tuition, or other course-related expenses. The objectives of the program are to enable active U.S. scientists and engineers to acquire sufficient familiarity with the language and customs of Japan to allow them to function independently there; or to acquire sufficient expertise in reading Japanese to be able to understand technical abstracts in their field of interest. There is a critical need for more effective technical communication between American and Japanese researchers. This award is intended to help remove language and cultural barriers to U.S.-Japanese cooperative research and to facilitate science and technology exchange.

		5( 81 ). This award will support study of the Japanese language by an American scientist or engineer by providing a stipend, tuition, or other course-related expenses. The objectives of the program are to enable active U.S. scientists and engineers to acquire sufficient familiarity with the language and customs of Japan to allow them to function independently there; or to acquire sufficient expertise in reading Japanese to be able to understand technical abstracts in their field of interest. There is a critical need for more effective technical communication between American and Japanese researchers. This award is intended to help remove language and cultural barriers to U.S.-Japanese cooperative research and to facilitate science and technology exchange.

		6( 96 ). This award will support study of the Japanese language by an American scientist or engineer by providing a stipend, tuition, or other course-related expenses. The objectives of the program are to enable active U.S. scientists and engineers to acquire sufficient familiarity with the language and customs of Japan to allow them to function independently there; or to acquire sufficient expertise in reading Japanese to be able to understand technical abstracts in their field of interest. There is a critical need for more effective technical communication between American and Japanese researchers. This award is intended to help remove language and cultural barriers to U.S.-Japanese cooperative research and to facilitate science and technology exchange.

		7( 255 ). This project involves the creation of a new parallel programming language, called PRAM-Pascal, and the construction of a compiler of this language into machine language of a parallel random access machine (PRAM). When completed, it will allow users to program in a high level parallel language similar to C* of Connection MachineTM and to monitor the execution of the code. Such a compiler would provide colleges and universities with an environment where undergraduate computer science students can experiment with a parallel computer.

		8( 340 ). This award will support study of the Japanese language by an American scientist or engineer by providing a stipend, tuition, or other course-related expenses. The objectives of the program are to enable active U.S. scientists and engineers to acquire sufficient familiarity with the language and customs of Japan to allow them to function independently there; or to acquire sufficient expertise in reading Japanese to be able to understand technical abstracts in their field of interest. There is a critical need for more effective technical communication between American and Japanese researchers. This award is intended to help remove language and cultural barriers to U.S.-Japanese cooperative research and to facilitate science and technology exchange.


	Top Words:
		1. JAPANESE
		2. LANGUAGE
		3. SUFFICIENT
		4. ACQUIRE
		5. TECHNICAL


Cluster 20

	Documents:
		1( 14 ). Taste is a very important sense because it is involved in food selection and preference, and related to hunger, ingestion, and nutritional aspects of behavior. Most studies of taste have involved rodents, which have aspects of physiology and behavior very different from humans, and there are few data on gustatory processing to compare human sensory capabilities with rodent physiology. This study utilizes a novel approach of chronic recording from a behaving animal to explore how activity in the cortex of a primate brain correlates to behavior. Response characteristics and functional organization of the cortex will be explored, to determine how well data from human psychophysical studies are matched by electrophysiological data. This novel approach will provide data important for chemosensory science, for comparing functional organization of gustatory cortex with other sensory cortical areas, and for further understanding how brain activity underlies perception and behavior.

		2( 226 ). The use of real time, computationally intensive graphical methods as diagnostical procedures in statistical problems will be explored. Residuals in high dimensional regression problems will be studied by means of restricted grand tours. Innovative computational procedures such as slicing regressions to find structure will be examined. This procedure is semiparametric rather than nonparametric and promises to yield useful results when a few basic assumptions are satisfied. Furthermore novel graphical summaries of uncertainty will be explored in high dimensional problems.


	Top Words:
		1. GRAPHICAL
		2. EXPLORED
		3. CORTEX
		4. NOVEL
		5. TASTE


